pubs.acs.org/CR

Review

New Insights into the Cooperativity and Dynamics of Dimeric
Enzymes
Ke-Wei Chen, Tian-Yu Sun, and Yun-Dong Wu*
Cite This: Chem. Rev. 2023, 123, 9940−9981

Downloaded via ZHEJIANG UNIV on November 24, 2025 at 17:13:47 (UTC).
See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles.

ACCESS

Read Online

Metrics & More

Article Recommendations

ABSTRACT: A survey of protein databases indicates that the majority of enzymes exist in
oligomeric forms, with about half of those found in the UniProt database being
homodimeric. Understanding why many enzymes are in their dimeric form is imperative.
Recent developments in experimental and computational techniques have allowed for a
deeper comprehension of the cooperative interactions between the subunits of dimeric
enzymes. This review aims to succinctly summarize these recent advancements by providing
an overview of experimental and theoretical methods, as well as an understanding of
cooperativity in substrate binding and the molecular mechanisms of cooperative catalysis
within homodimeric enzymes. Focus is set upon the beneficial effects of dimerization and
cooperative catalysis. These advancements not only provide essential case studies and
theoretical support for comprehending dimeric enzyme catalysis but also serve as a
foundation for designing highly efficient catalysts, such as dimeric organic catalysts.
Moreover, these developments have significant implications for drug design, as exemplified
by Paxlovid, which was designed for the homodimeric main protease of SARS-CoV-2.

CONTENTS
1. Introduction
2. Biological Necessity of Dimeric Enzymes
2.1. More Favorable Protein Folding
2.2. Higher Thermal Stability than Monomer
2.3. Higher Catalytic Activity than Monomer
2.4. Activation or Inhibition in Regulatory
Proteins
3. Experimental and Computational Techniques for
Dimeric Enzymes
3.1. Biophysical Experimental Detection and
Analysis Methods
3.1.1. Various Experimental Techniques to
Determine the Structure of Enzymes
3.1.2. Enzyme Kinetic Experiments
3.2. Computational Simulation and Analysis
Methods
3.2.1. Molecular Dynamics Simulation and
Enhanced Sampling
3.2.2. Protein−Ligand/Protein Binding Prediction
3.2.3. Multiscale Simulation
3.2.4. New Developments in Allosteric Pathway Prediction
4. Cooperativity of Homodimeric Enzymes in
Substrate Binding
4.1. Single Ligand-Binding Models
4.1.1. Classical Allosteric Theories

4.1.2. Allosteric Ensemble Model Based on
the Thermodynamic Energy Landscape
4.1.3. The Thermodynamic Nature of Allostery and Its Effect on Binding Affinity
4.2. Dual Ligand-Binding Models
5. Cooperativity and Dynamics of Homodimeric
Enzymes in Catalysis
5.1. Theories and Advancements in Enzyme
Catalysis
5.2. Negative Cooperativity between Subunits
5.3. Positive Cooperativity between Subunits
5.3.1. Empty Subunit Dynamics
5.3.2. Improving Catalytic Efficiency
5.3.3. Substrate Binding Coupled with Product Release and Alternating Catalytic
Sites
6. Factors That Affect Catalytic Efficiency/Cooperativity between Subunits
6.1. Cofactor/Ligand or pH-induced Changes in
Conformation or Oligomeric Form

9941
9942
9942
9943
9943
9944
9944
9944
9944
9945
9946
9946

9950
9950
9951
9952
9952
9952
9953
9953
9954
9958
9959
9959

9946
9947
Received: January 19, 2023
Published: August 10, 2023

9947
9948
9948
9948

© 2023 American Chemical Society

9940

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.3c00042
Chem. Rev. 2023, 123, 9940−9981

Chemical Reviews

pubs.acs.org/CR

Review

Table 1. Proportions of Oligomeric Forms of All Species in the Brenda and UniProt Databases

a
These numbers were generated through the “Search Subunits” module of the Brenda database in May 2023. bThese numbers were generated
through the “(structure_3d: true) AND (cc_subunit: from monomer to actamer)” module of the UniProt database in May 2023.

6.2. Environmental Changes due to Mutations
or Amino Acid Modifications
6.3. Differences between Homologous Enzymes
6.4. How to Distinguish Cooperativity from
Conformational Analysis
7. The Important Role of the Subunit−Subunit
Interface
7.1. Long-Range Interactions between the Interface and the Catalytic Pocket
7.2. Mediating Site-to-Site Communication
7.3. Facilitating Enzyme Evolution
8. Dimeric Organic Catalysts and Binuclear Catalysts
8.1. The Synergy in Dimeric Organic Catalysts
8.2. The Synergy in Binuclear Catalysts
9. Conclusions and Future Directions
Author Information
Corresponding Author
Authors
Author Contributions
Notes
Biographies
Acknowledgments
Abbreviations
References

ing to a subset of protein PDB structures available in the
UniProt database, the homodimeric form of the protein
accounts for more than 51%, far more than the monomeric and
other oligomeric forms (Table 1b).
Additionally, the vast majority of homodimeric forms consist
of subunits between 200 and 600 amino acids, with subunits
ranging from 200 to 400, accounting for 41%. Subunits
containing more than 800 amino acids are infrequent (Table
2a). Enzymes that require cofactors such as metal ions, NAD,
NADP, ATP, FAD, and thiamine are predominantly
homodimeric, constituting more than 50% of all oligomeric
forms (ranging from monomer to octamer), as shown in Table
2b. Homodimeric enzymes that require cofactors are often
accompanied by multiple forms of cofactors, such as ubiquitinlike modification activating enzymes UBA58 and insulindegrading enzymes,9 both of which require activation by zinc
ions (Zn2+) and ATP for function. Additionally, the ratio of
homodimeric forms are more than 50% in enzymes that have
various catalytic functions, such as transferase,10,11 lyase,12,13
hydrolase,14,15 ligase,16,17 oxidoreductase,18−20 isomerase,21,22
etc. (Table 2c). In some cases, such as glycine-tRNA ligase, the
enzymes have various catalytic functions, including aminoacyltRNA synthetase, hydrolase, ligase, and transferase activities,23
all of which are coupled in the same enzyme. These data also
indicate that the dimeric form of an enzyme is more common
across various organisms.
The classic Monod−Wyman−Changeux (MWC)24 and
Perutz’s two-structure stereochemical model25 for hemoglobin
established a foundation for the concept of allostery and
cooperativity, providing a basis for understanding the
cooperativity between subunits in dimeric enzymes. The
cooperativity between subunits in homodimeric enzymes is
increasingly recognized as one of their most notable features
compared to the monomeric forms. This allosteric regulation
between subunits causes the two subunits to differ in their
affinity for substrate/product or catalytic efficiency by
conformational changes between subunits or otherwise.
Understanding the communication mechanism between the
active sites enhances the design of binuclear biocatalysts or
nanomachines for industrial applications. In this review, we
present an overview of the models of cooperativity between
subunits in homodimeric enzymes (excluding ribozymes),
which includes (1) the biological necessity of dimeric enzymes,
(2) experimental and computational methods for studying the

9960
9960
9960
9961
9961
9961
9961
9962
9963
9963
9964
9965
9965
9965
9965
9965
9965
9965
9965
9967

1. INTRODUCTION
In recent years, there has been tremendous development in
dimeric enzymes with two identical or nonidentical subunits,
which has resulted in increased interest in their biological
necessity,1 functional motions and allosteric regulation,2
catalytic mechanisms,3 and the development of inhibitors
and activators.4
The Brenda database (https://www.brenda-enzymes.org)
archives tens of thousands of classified enzymes from diverse
species.5 In the subset of the enzymes where the oligomeric
form is defined, dimeric enzymes surpass those of the
monomeric form (Table 1a). Consistent with earlier findings,
the number of enzymes that possess even-numbered subunits
(2n) is greater than that of the ones with odd-numbered
subunits (2n − 1).6 Currently, the most wide-ranging protein
database is the UniProt database (https://www.uniprot.org),
which characterizes proteins from various categories.7 Accord9941

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.3c00042
Chem. Rev. 2023, 123, 9940−9981

Chemical Reviews

pubs.acs.org/CR

Review

Table 2. Subunit Sizes and Cofactors and Their Functions of Dimeric Enzymes in the UniProt Database

c

These numbers were generated through the “(structure_3d: true) AND (cc_subunit: Homodimer) AND (length: [a TO b])” module of the
UniProt database in May 2023. dThese numbers were generated through the “(structure_3d: true) AND (cc_subunit: Homodimer) AND
(keyword: “cofactor name”)” module of the UniProt database in May 2023. eThese numbers were generated through the “(structure_3d: true)
AND (cc_subunit: Homodimer) AND (keyword: “Type of enzyme”)” module of the UniProt database in May 2023.

cooperativity and dynamics of catalysis in dimeric enzymes,
(3) ligand binding, where the two subunits exhibit different
binding affinities for the ligand, (4) diverse molecular
mechanisms underlying cooperativity between subunits in
catalysis, which lead to their high catalytic efficiency, (5) key
factors affecting cooperativity or catalytic efficiency in dimeric
enzymes, (6) the significant role of subunit interfaces in
mediating cooperativity and evolution, and (7) synergistic
catalysis (different from cooperativity) of dimeric organic small
molecule catalysts and binuclear catalysts. Finally, the
challenges and future directions of dimeric enzymes in
mechanism exploration and design are discussed, emphasizing
the immense potential of deep learning in the field of enzyme
catalysis.
We hope the review will benefit researchers in the fields of
computational biology, chemistry, structural biology, and
bioinformatics, who are actively investigating enzymatic
catalysis mechanisms and are interested in using the models
and methods we present. While these models and methods
focus on studying homodimeric enzymes, we believe that
researchers can apply them to the study of other homooligomeric enzymes, including heteromultimers composed of
multiple subunits such as soluble methane monooxygenase
(MMO).26 Moreover, we anticipate that the knowledge gained
from studying dimeric enzymes will facilitate the rational
design of dimeric organic catalysts that exhibit better reactivity
and selectivity.

weight as the dimer), it only needs to encode the protein once
in the genome. This is known as “genetic saving”. The
likelihood of errors during gene duplication and its translation
is directly proportional to the length of the gene. Additionally,
the time it takes for ribosomes to traverse shorter mRNAs may
be more favorable.1
Protein folding is a significant energy-consuming process.
Enzymatic protein synthesis requires the transformation of
disordered protein folding into an ordered protein structure.
For homodimeric enzymes, the folding of the monomer is
coupled with the process of dimerization, which may occur
prior to the formation of secondary or tertiary structures or
during or after these formations. This phenomenon reduces
the degree of freedom of the protein, resulting in a smoother
conformational potential energy surface conducive to rapid and
correct assembly in the cellular environment.1 This is mainly
because the decrease in enthalpy brought about by
dimerization is greater than the loss in entropy, which leads
to a decrease in the free energy of folding (Figure 1). This

2. BIOLOGICAL NECESSITY OF DIMERIC ENZYMES
Numerous studies have shown that the dimeric form of
enzymes plays an essential role in physiological functions.
Dimerization is widely supported by theories of promoting
protein folding, regulating enzyme stability, higher catalytic
efficiency, and modulating regulatory protein activity.
2.1. More Favorable Protein Folding

Fundamentally, the synthesis of enzymes is closely related to
gene regulation, referring to a series of processes from gene to
protein expression, which includes genetic saving, transcription, post-transcriptional modification, translation, and
post-translational modification. In 2005, Finazzi-Agro et al.
suggested enzymes that form homodimers may result from
natural evolutionary selection that often favors more favorable
gene regulation.1 When a protein exists as a dimer, compared
to a protein that exists as a monomer (with the same molecular

Figure 1. Funnel model of protein folding for dimers and monomers.
After the dimerization of two unfolded (red lines) or partially folded
(blue lines) monomers, there are fewer traps encountered during
protein folding relative to single monomers (black lines). Due to
enthalpy domination, dimerization causes the protein folding process
to become more favorable.
9942

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.3c00042
Chem. Rev. 2023, 123, 9940−9981

Chemical Reviews

pubs.acs.org/CR

phenomenon is consistent with three-state transition mechanism for dimeric protein folding.27,28 Isothermal titration
calorimetry (ITC) and circular dichroism (CD) spectra can
assist in characterizing the thermodynamics and specificity of
protein−protein/nucleic acid binding. For example, Wang et
al. showed that the binding process of yeast transcriptional
activator GCN4 to DNA is driven by enthalpy and
accompanied by unfavorable entropy change, as measured by
ITC.29 With explicit solvent molecular dynamics (MD),
combined with enhanced sampling techniques such as
umbrella sampling, it is possible to provide a more complete
picture of protein−protein associations and predict association
free energies.30−32 Tse et al. modeled the free energy landscape
and thermodynamics of protein−protein association for HIV-1
integrase (IN) multimerization induced by allosteric HIV-1
integrase inhibitors (ALLINIs). Decomposition of the
potential mean force (PMF) into entropy and enthalpy33
shows that although water molecules are expelled into the bulk
when the proteins are brought close together, resulting in a
small increase in entropy, the solvent entropy gain from water
release is nearly offset by the decrease of side chain entropy
when the two proteins approach each other. Thus, IN
multimerization is typically driven by enthalpy over entropy.30
Moreover, the folding process of monomers with the same size
as dimers is affected by increased peptide chain length and
long-range interactions, resulting in slower protein folding
rates.34
In multidomain proteins, one of the domains has been
shown to facilitate the folding of the others.35−38 For example,
complete folding of the homodimer Pyrococcus furiosus Lasparaginase (PfA) proceeds in a cooperative manner,
accompanied by the folding of the entire protein, to avoid
the accumulation of aggregation-prone monomeric intermediates.36−38 It is analogous to each subunit of the homodimer
acting as a chaperone, ensuring the proper folding of the
opposite subunit.39 The precise detection of protein folding
process is crucial to elucidate the cooperative mechanism
among subunits. MD simulations40−42 and several biophysical
methods, such as nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR),43
fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET),44 ITC,45 CD
spectroscopy,46 cryoelectron microscopy (cryo-EM),47 hydrogen exchange (HX)-mass spectrometry (MS),48 and highpressure NMR49 have been utilized for studying protein
folding. Given the powerful tools available, there is optimism
for further advancement in the study of dimeric enzyme
folding.

Review

equilibrium, comprising 70% monomer and 30% dimer.
Moreover, the dimeric form exhibited 65% more activity
than its monomeric counterpart and was more resilient against
heat and proteolytic digestion by trypsin or chymotrypsin.75
Additionally, MST1, a serine/threonine mammalian sterility
20-like kinase (MST1) promotes caspase-dependent and
-independent apoptosis. Aruxandei and colleagues demonstrated that the monomeric SARAH domain is thermodynamically unstable and that homodimerization is coupled with
folding.76 Mutations at the interface of a dimer can disturb the
stable interaction between two subunits, leading to anticorrelated motions or even dissociation.77−79 Methyltransferases
(MTases) are often homodimers, with knot-like regions in
each subunit comprising a significant portion of the dimer
interface.80 For instance, Yue et al. mutated the dimerization
interface of the knotted protein YbeA from E. coli, a member of
the α/β-junction MTases subclass, significantly reducing the
mechanical force necessary for dimer separation.77 These
results suggest that modifying the subunit−subunit interface is
a widely used strategy for stabilizing homodimeric enzymes.
Stabilization of homodimeric enzymes can be achieved
through different approaches such as introducing disulfide
bonds between the subunit−subunit interfaces81−83 or stable
mutations to strengthen subunit interactions84 and prevent
homodimeric enzyme dissociation. Protein engineering
techniques like directed evolution (DE),85 and prediction of
hot spot amino acids86,87 can also be used to rationally
introduce stabilization to the interface. The design of
stabilizing protein−protein interactions is also of great
importance. Chen et al. proposed a computational pipeline
for finding protein stabilizers.88 First, a set of three-dimensional structures of protein−protein complexes is prepared
either by experiments or protein prediction models, such as
Alphafold. Then, Fpocket89 is utilized to identify druggable
pockets at the protein interface, and molecular dynamics (MD)
is employed to evaluate the stability of pockets or explore
hidden pockets. Afterward, utilizing molecular docking, the
most promising protein interaction stabilizers are quickly
identified from millions of drugs. To exemplify their approach,
they applied it to five protein complex structures and suggested
the 10 most potentially stable molecules among 1 million
randomly selected drugs in the ZINC20 drug database.90
2.3. Higher Catalytic Activity than Monomer

Certain enzymes are only biologically active when in
homodimeric form,10,91−94 as in the case of the psychrophilic
acyl aminoacyl peptidase from Sporosarcina psychrophila
(spAAP). The enzyme’s monomer form is unstable and
inactive.92 This phenomenon is more common when the
catalytic pocket is situated at the dimerization interface,93,95,96
such as 3-hydroxyisobutyrate dehydrogenase from Bacillus
cereus (bcHIBADH), where an intersubunit cleft forms a
putative active site accommodating cofactors (NAD+) and
substrate mimetics.95 Similarly, outer membrane phospholipase
A (OMPLA) also dimerizes to form two substrate-binding
pockets at the dimer interface, in addition to functional
oxyanion holes that are absent in monomeric OMPLA.97
It is also notable that for some homodimeric enzymes
(nonmembrane signaling proteins), their monomeric forms
tend to be less active, and “smart” enzymes have increased
their activity after homodimerization. DNA methyltransferases
recognize specific DNA sequences and transfer methyl groups
from the cofactor AdoMet to cytosine or adenine residues

2.2. Higher Thermal Stability than Monomer

Dimer formation not only happens to be energetically and
temporally more favorable than the folding of two monomers
but also provides increased thermal stability.50−52 Protein
aggregation, similar to folding, is primarily driven by
hydrophobic interactions,39 while some dimers rely on
interfacial disulfide bonds53,54 or tyrosine cross-linking55,56
for their stabilization. The strength of these interactions that
subsequently triggers the monomer−dimer equilibrium can be
modified by different denaturing conditions such as salt
concentration,57 heat,58−60 pH,61,62 pressure,63 urea,64−66
guanidine hydrochloride (GdnCl),67,68 ethanol (EtOH),69
cholesterol,70 cholate,71,72 etc., as well as interfacial water
molecules.73,74
The copper/zinc-superoxide dismutase (Cu/Zn-SOD)
extracted from lemon demonstrated two active forms in
9943

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.3c00042
Chem. Rev. 2023, 123, 9940−9981

Chemical Reviews

pubs.acs.org/CR

Review

within the recognition site. Dimerization is necessary for
optimal dsDNA binding required for methylation, because
although its monomeric form can bind AdoMet and Mg2+, it
cannot methylate single strands.91 Diaminopimelate (DAP)
epimerase is involved in the biosynthesis of meso-DAP and
lysine, which are important precursor for the synthesis of
peptidoglycan, housekeeping proteins and virulence factors in
bacteria. Studies have shown that the DAP epimerase
monomer is not catalytically active. MD simulations have
indicated that the DAP epimerase monomer is intrinsically
more flexible than the dimer, so formation of DAP epimerase
dimers may contribute to attenuation of conformational
flexibility at the active site resides for optimal function,98
which was also observed in dapE-encoded N-succinyl-L,Ldiaminopimelic acid desuccinylase (DapE).99 In the alkaline
phosphatase (AP) of E. coli, the constructed T59R mainly
exists in the form of a monomer in solution, while the T59A
mutant primarily exists in the form of a dimer. Interestingly,
the activity of T59R is only 10−4 of that of T59A, accompanied
by a decrease in thermal stability and the amount of tightly
bound metal.51 Steady-state kinetic analysis of the mitochondrial cytochrome b-c1 complex found that the homodimer was
2−3 times more active than the monomeric form.100 The
engineered monomer of triosephosphate isomerase (TIM) is
also 3 orders of magnitude less active than the natural
dimer.101 A study on the relationship between the activity of
GH1 β-glucosidase from Spodoptera f rugiperda (Sfβgly) and its
oligomerization state demonstrated that homodimerization
occurs through a conformational selection mechanism, by
which monomers exchange conformation and then combine
with similar monomers to form a more active homodimeric
enzyme.102
Many examples demonstrate the superior activity of dimeric
enzymes over monomeric enzymes. Dimeric enzymes exhibit
increased cooperativity between subunits, such that the
substrate affinity and catalytic efficiency of one subunit can
be easily affected by the neighboring subunit (see sections 4
and 5). As important regulators, cofactors such as metal ions,
thiamine, and ATP, etc. can affect the catalytic efficiency of
dimeric enzymes by stabilizing the catalytic conformation of
the dimer and regulating its oligomeric state (see section 6.1).

activators and inhibitors. For example, the class D fungal
GPCR dimer, Ste2,115 and anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK),
a receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK),116 are both affected by their
corresponding activators which lead to their dimerization and
activation. Similar activation mechanisms exist in nonregulatory proteins as well. The substrate phenylalanine
(Phe) can bind to a site on the N-terminal regulatory domain
(PAH-RD) of the multidomain enzyme phenylalanine
hydroxylase (PAH), resulting in dimerization of PAH-RD
and activating the enzymatic activity.117
In short, scientists have gained a preliminary understanding
of the biological necessity of homodimeric enzymes, and the
subunit−subunit interface may play a significant role in the
stability and the function of homodimeric enzyme. However,
the various favorable factors proposed by Finazzi-Agro for
homodimeric enzymes at the level of gene regulation have not
been proved by experiments. As well as the exact kinetic factors
that drive protein dimerization are difficult to quantify and
further research is needed for better insight. The precise
molecular mechanism by which dimeric enzymes bind and
catalyze the substrate is not yet fully understood. This review
will examine diverse approaches for identifying and analyzing
homodimeric enzymes as well as several models for substrate
binding and catalysis.

2.4. Activation or Inhibition in Regulatory Proteins

3.1. Biophysical Experimental Detection and Analysis
Methods

3. EXPERIMENTAL AND COMPUTATIONAL
TECHNIQUES FOR DIMERIC ENZYMES
Many studies have noted that certain enzymes can enhance the
rate of typical chemical reactions by more than 1017 times.118
Determining substrate specificity and metabolic function based
solely on sequence and genomic analysis is challenging for
many homodimeric enzymes.119 Consequently, a range of
precise biochemical techniques have been developed and
enhanced to provide greater insight into enzymatic processes.
These methodologies encompass various biophysical experimental techniques, including X-ray crystallography,120
NMR,121,122 mass spectrometry (MS) detection,123 CD,124
ITC,125,126 temperature-jump,127 and stopped-flow analysis,128
among others. Additionally, in the field of enzyme design and
catalysis, several analytical techniques based on MD as well as
machine learning methods are frequently employed.

For many regulatory proteins and membrane proteins in cells,
homodimerization is also a factor leading to the activation103−106 or inhibition107,108 of enzymes. Caspase-9, for
example, exists as an inactive monomer in physiological
conditions. However, during apoptosis, caspase-9 binds to
cofactor Apaf-1 to form apoptosomes, which then dimerize to
activate and transmit downstream the apoptosis process.103
Allosteric activators or ATP cause Hsp90 chaperones to
populate closed N-terminal dimerization states, which are also
considered the activated state of the chaperone.109,110
Similarly, human epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
is activated by dimerization resulting from binding with a
single epidermal growth factor (EGF).111
In contrast, ATM protein kinase,107 receptor proteintyrosine phosphatase α (RPTPα)112 and human APC/Cassociated ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme UBE2S113 inhibit
their autocatalytic activity in homodimers. The monomer−
dimer transition of these regulatory proteins is important for
normal cell function.114 Some signal regulatory proteins are
often oligomeric and are subject to allosteric effects by various

Enzyme dynamics play a crucial role in substrate binding and
product release,129,130 although its potential ability to stabilize
the transition state, especially fast dynamics, remains
disputed.131,132 Nonetheless, there is a potential relationship
between it and enzyme catalysis.133 Identifying the precise
conformations and their respective roles in reaction cycles is
vital to comprehensively understand enzyme catalysis. Over
time, numerous effective tools have become available to closely
observe the dynamic transition of enzymes during catalytic
processes.
3.1.1. Various Experimental Techniques to Determine the Structure of Enzymes. (1) X-ray crystallography
is a highly reliable technique for determining enzyme structure,
first introduced in the 1930s.134 Its potential has been validated
in various enzyme structures.135−137 More precisely, the
molecules in a protein crystal diffract incoming X-rays,
producing a series of diffraction spots with varying intensities,
which can be captured and recorded. These data are
commonly known as diffraction images or diffraction patterns.
9944

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.3c00042
Chem. Rev. 2023, 123, 9940−9981

Chemical Reviews

pubs.acs.org/CR

After processing and analyzing the diffraction images, scientists
can determine the position and arrangement of atoms in the
crystal and ultimately generate a three-dimensional model of
the protein. The determination of crystal structure is crucial for
the understanding of the catalytic mechanism of enzymes,
including identifying conformational changes in catalysis, key
catalytic amino acids, and the number of bound substrates.138−141 Some X-ray-free electron laser methods, such
as serial femtosecond crystallography (SFX),142 as well as cryoEM,143 microcrystal electron diffraction (micro-ED),144 and
neutron crystallography,145 have been developed and employed. Mourey et al. have already reviewed and compared
their relative advantages and disadvantages against X-ray
crystallography.134 Single X-ray structures are sometimes due
to the random selection of a single structure from the protein
ensemble.146 Alternatively, room temperature X-ray crystallography (RTX) offers a wider range of conformational variations,
which when combined with kinetic experiments can generate
structure and function relationships.146−148 Additionally, Pai et
al. have developed the time-resolved crystallography technique
to obtain crystal structures of proteins in milliseconds or longer
with time delay.149 Single-molecule FRET (smFRET) can also
capture the dynamic changes of proteins.150 Gouridis et al.
found that 95% of the SBDs of GlnPQ, an importer of
asparagine, glutamine, and glutamate, were in the open
conformation in the absence of substrate. It transitions to
the closed state upon binding to a high-affinity ligand,
presumably by an induced-fit mechanism.151
(2) NMR is a another commonly used technique for
identifying protein structures. In contrast to X-ray crystallography, NMR employs the phenomenon of nuclear magnetic
resonance to extract structural information from nuclear spin
signals in proteins. In NMR, scientists subject protein samples
to a strong magnetic field and use radio waves to stimulate
nuclear spins. These nuclear spins then relax in a specific
manner and emit specific electromagnetic signals. By recording
these signals and utilizing mathematical algorithms and
computer simulations, scientists can determine the location
and manner in which the nuclear spins interact within the
protein. Unlike X-ray crystallography, NMR is able to
investigate protein structures in solution, rendering it a
valuable tool for examining dynamic and amorphous proteins.
Additionally, NMR experiments do not necessitate high-quality
crystal samples, making it more appropriate for examining
macromolecules and complexes.152 For more information on
NMR spin relaxation techniques, refer to the review by Palmer
III.153
NMR is highly effective in capturing intermediates involved
in protein folding or catalysis, as demonstrated by numerous
studies.154−156 Techniques such as high-pressure NMR
techniques can capture high-energy conformations by utilizing
the pressure-dependent nature of protein conformation.
Protein folding can be studied using the pressure-unfolding
properties of proteins,49 and the structural description of the
transition state ensemble (TSE) can be deduced from the
partial molar volume (PMV) of each conformer by analyzing
the pressure-dependent enzyme kinetics.157 Stiller et al.
developed a method to determine high-resolution structures
of protein high-energy states by coupling NMR spectroscopyderived pseudocontact shifts (PCS) with Carr−Purcell−
Meiboom−Gill (CPMG). The method is accurate and
sensitive to long-range structural changes such as domain
reorientation, making it effective for proteins up to 60 kDa.158

Review

Furthermore, the information technology has led to the
development of SPARTA+, an algorithm based on a powerful
artificial neural network that predicts NMR chemical shift
quickly through the known crystal structure. This method
saves time and cost compared to experiments.159
(3) Various chromatographic techniques are used widely to
investigate protein secondary structure. The secondary
structure of proteins can selectively absorb left-handed or
right-handed circularly polarized light, resulting in optical
extinction. CD is capable of measuring circularly polarized light
absorption spectra, which provide valuable information
regarding the secondary structure of proteins such as α-helices,
β-sheets, and random coils.160 Furthermore, CD chromatography is widely used in protein science to monitor protein
folding, measure protein−ligand interactions, and identify
conformational motions.161 Among different chromatographic
techniques, Gel filtration chromatography coupled to a
multiple angle light scattering detector can separate dimer
and monomer states based on molecular weight. This
technique can also determine the dimer dissociation constant
(kd) in the micromolar range.102
3.1.2. Enzyme Kinetic Experiments. (1) Enzyme
catalytic kinetic experiments can provide various catalytic
properties, including the Michaelis−Menten constant (Km),
which represents the affinity of the enzyme for the substrate,
and the catalytic rate (kcat). The Michaelis−Menten equation,162 compared to the Hill equation163 and other more
complex equations, is the most commonly employed equation
in enzymatic kinetic. A current variant of the Michaelis−
Menten equation can be expressed as eq 1:
v=

Vmax × [S]
K m + [S]

(1)

where v is the velocity of enzyme catalysis, Vmax is the
maximum velocity when all enzymes are complexed with the
substrate, [S] is the substrate concentration, and Km is a
pseudoequilibrium constant called the Michaelis−Menten
constant.
According to the Michaelis−Menten model, enzymes are
single-state catalysts that bind a substrate and promote its
conversion into a product. The central component of this
reaction framework is the monomeric enzyme E. It binds the
substrate S at the active site, forming the enzyme−substrate
complex ES. The enzyme then converts the substrate to the
product P, which is subsequently removed from the system and
cannot return to its original state as a substrate.164 However,
many enzymes are not static; rather, they are dynamic
macromolecules that continually fluctuate between different
conformational states. For instance, Monod−Wyman−
Changeux (MWC) theory proposes that MWC enzymes
switch between two possible states: the active state EA and the
inactive state EI.165 By assessing changes in the ratio of active
to inactive states of the MWC enzyme through various
allosteric small molecules, a quantitative description of MWC
enzymes different from the Michaelis−Menten equation can be
developed (Figure 2).164
Steady-state kinetics based on the Michaelis−Menten
equation and presteady-state kinetics (or rapid kinetics) are
crucial to understanding the nature of enzymatic reactions.
Steady-state kinetics investigates the reaction rate that arises
after a substrate has combined with an enzyme and has reached
a stable state in which the production of the product equates to
9945

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.3c00042
Chem. Rev. 2023, 123, 9940−9981

Chemical Reviews

pubs.acs.org/CR

Review

now reached unprecedented levels of sophistication. Simulations of millions of particles at the microsecond level (μs) are
now frequently utilized,178 and even millisecond level (ms)
simulations can be conducted.179 High-performance computers specifically designed for biomolecular simulations,180−182 or general-purpose high performance computing
systems (HPC) can also be used to conduct simulations of
over a billion particles.183 Using various machine learning
algorithms in conjunction with these techniques enables the
detection of more detailed structural transformations that may
not otherwise be detected in biophysical experiments.
3.2.1. Molecular Dynamics Simulation and Enhanced
Sampling. MD is a physical model, usually based on classical
molecular mechanics (MM), which allows for in-depth
observation of the representative behavior of proteins in
both time and space. Additionally, MD can be conducted using
quantum mechanics (QM)184 or QM/MM,185,186 which is
ideal for exploring chemical reactions or charge transfers within
catalytic pockets but requires additional computational
resources and longer execution times (see section 3.2.4).
The accuracy of force fields and the efficiency of sampling have
been the primary areas of focus in MD research.
Various MD simulation programs have been developed with
different protein force fields to address these areas of focus,
including AMBER,187,188 GROMACS,189 GROMOS,190 and
CHARMM.191,192 In addition, coarse-grained MARTINI force
field,193 SIRAH force field194 and AWSEM force fields195,196
can be utilized for protein simulations. Small molecule force
field GAFF,197 sugar or phospholipid force field GLYCAM198
can be combined with AMBER protein force fields.
Furthermore, RSFF2C, a residue-specific force field developed
by our group, exhibited excellent performance in predicting the
structures of cyclic peptides and two-residue peptides.199−201
Enhancing sampling efficiency for macromolecules is integral
in studying protein folding, substrate binding, catalysis, and
other processes involving extensive conformational movements. Enhanced sampling methods are divided into two
categories: predefined reaction coordinates or collective
variables (CVs), including umbrella sampling,202 metadynamics (MetaD),203 and conformational space annealing,204 or
collective variable-free methods such as replica exchange
molecular dynamics (REMD),205 accelerated dynamics simulation,206 and integrated tempering sampling (ITS).207,208 Our
group’s research demonstrates that high-temperature MD
methods can achieve comparable sample space as REMD but
with significant time savings.209 Collective variables are
challenging to identify in most cases, and thus, the latter
method is more suited for dealing with enzyme conformational
fluctuations. A recent article reviews various enhanced
sampling methods and their developments.210 Recently,
Wang et al. proposed a new reinforced dynamics (RID)
method that uses neural networks to handle hundreds of
dimensional set variables and achieve higher sampling
efficiency.211 Integration of machine learning into MD has
become a trend for exploring the dynamic changes of
macromolecules.
3.2.2. Protein−Ligand/Protein Binding Prediction.
Docking is a commonly used method for predicting the
strength of noncovalent protein−ligand interactions, and the
accuracy of the prediction is dependent on the quality of the
scoring function. Scoring functions, mainly used to predict the
binding pose of ligands to proteins, ranking of chemical
molecules in virtual screening, and binding affinity, can be

Figure 2. States and weights for a MWC enzyme. where [Etot]
represents the total amount of the four enzymatic states, i.e., [Etot] =
[EA] + [EAS] + [EI] + [EIS]; energies ϵA and ϵI provide the free
energy scale for the substrate-free conformations, which determines
the relative probability of active and inactive conformations; KMA
represents the substrate concentration when half the active enzymes
are bound and half the active enzyme are unbound, and KMI
represents the substrate concentration when half the inactive enzymes
are bound and half the inactive enzymes are unbound, and the
product formation rate is represented by d[P]/dt.

the consumption of the substrate. This enzyme−substrate
complex’s reaction rate and substrate concentration are
exhibited by a saturation curve, a relationship explained by
the Michaelis−Menten equation. Using steady-state kinetics,
one can determine whether the active site of the homodimeric
enzyme works independently and measure the substrate
affinity constant Km and catalytic rate kcat for most enzyme
turnover processes.100,166 Contrastingly, presteady-state kinetics focuses on the first turnover and can study intermediates
that exist for a brief period and help to explain the reaction’s
mechanism, including reaction speed.167 By assaying these
reactions through temperature-jump127 and stopped-flow
analysis,128 researchers can identify communication and
cooperativity between active sites, and the Hill coefficient
can determine the degree of cooperativity within multisubunit
enzymes.168−171
(2) Various techniques, such as ITC,125,126 surface plasmon
resonance (SPR),172 biolayer interferometry (BLI),173 and
microscale thermophoresis (MST),174 allow the identification
of strong and weak binding constants but also enable the
quantification of the number of ligands that are bound by each
subunit. Combining two molecules can cause heat release or
absorption, causing a change in the solution’s temperature.
Measuring the heat absorption and heat release can determine
the thermodynamic parameters, such as the binding constant
(Kd), enthalpy change (ΔH), and entropy change (ΔS)
between different molecules. ITC experimental data is
analyzed by plotting endothermic heat against molar ratios.
These plots can determine the binding characteristics of
molecules, such as Kd, ΔH, and ΔS, from the curves’ shape.125
These parameters can explain the process of binding between
biomolecules. ITC is commonly combined with other
techniques to better assess enzymatic reactions. For example,
NMR spectroscopy coupled with ITC was able to detect
ligand-binding cooperativity and site-specific changes between
subunits in thymidylate synthase (TS).175−177
3.2. Computational Simulation and Analysis Methods

With improvements in processing power and data storage
capabilities over the past few decades, MD simulations have
9946

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.3c00042
Chem. Rev. 2023, 123, 9940−9981

Chemical Reviews

pubs.acs.org/CR

divided into the following three types: molecular force fieldbased, knowledge-based, and empirical scoring functions. The
empirical scoring function is the most common type of scoring
function. It is usually calibrated according to the experimentally measured binding affinity of complexes with known
structures. However, if the calibration data set does not
accurately measure the protein family, the prediction results
cannot be guaranteed. For in-depth details on scoring
functions, we recommend Bajorath’s pivotal review.212
Furthermore, Wang et al. conducted a comparative evaluation
of 16 prevalent scoring functions based on “docking pose,”
“ranking,” and “binding affinity.” Their results suggest that no
single scoring function consistently outperforms the others in
all three settings. As such, selecting the appropriate scoring
function for any particular purpose is paramount in practice.213
Notably, through MD simulations and its enhanced sampling
technology, protein−ligand conformational dynamics can be
simulated and predict their probable conformations under
certain conditions.214
Protein−protein interactions (PPI) prediction is a crucial
task that necessitates the consideration of diverse interactions
and flexible regions between the proteins. Besides the docking
scoring function-based techniques such as ZDock,215 RosettaDock,216 and HADDOCK,217 more and more deep learningbased methods such as ComplexContact218 and AF2Complex219 are employed in predicting protein−protein binding
conformations. AF2Complex does not rely on pairwise
multiple sequence alignment (MSA) to accurately predict the
quaternary structure of dimers and higher oligomeric
complexes.
Similarly, predicting protein−ligand/protein binding free
energy is an important challenge in molecular modeling. Along
with biophysical methods, MD binding enhanced sampling
technology is also commonly utilized.30,31,220,221 Specifically,
mainstream methods for predicting ligand−protein binding
free energy include molecular mechanics Poisson−Boltzmann
surface area (MMPBSA) and molecular mechanics generalized
Born surface area (MMGBSA) methods,222 linear interaction
energy (LIE) method,223 alchemical methods including
thermodynamic integration (TI),224 and free energy perturbation (FEP).225,226 The MMGBSA and MMPBSA methods
estimate the binding free energy by postprocessing MD
trajectories utilizing the following equation: ΔGbind = Gcomplex
− Gfree_ligand − Gfree_receptor. These methods use a continuous
model, such as Poisson−Boltzmann (PB) or Generalized Born
(GB), to estimate solvation and overcome the challenges,
including the solvent’s contribution to enthalpy and the
changes in entropy of the solvent.227 Although these methods
are widely utilized, free energy of solvation is estimated using a
continuous model, and conformational entropy is not
calculated directly, where normal mode or quasi-harmonic
methods are used to approximate it, leading to lower accuracy
compared to alchemical methods.227 Alchemical methods like
TI and FEP are also constrained because they are primarily
useful for estimating small relative free energy differences of
drug or protein structures that have minimal changes
(perturbations) and are expensive to use.228 Recently, machine
learning has been rapidly emerging as an effective tool for
predicting protein−ligand binding affinities, with methods like
DeepBindRG,229 DeepDTA,230 and KDEEP,231 which employ
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to represent the
protein−ligand interfaces. The fully connected layer connects
the feature vectors of structure and affinity and trains a neural

Review

network to finally output the predicted affinity. The recent
development of deep learning algorithms has significantly
accelerated the progress of protein design with higher accuracy
and efficiency.
3.2.3. Multiscale Simulation. The development of
multiscale simulation technologies such as QM/MM has
provided biologists with a comprehensive approach to studying
the catalytic mechanism of enzymes in greater detail despite its
high cost.185,186 Typically, the catalytic pocket of the enzyme is
divided into the QM region, adopting QM methods, and the
noncatalytic region outside the active pocket, which relies on
MM methods. The accuracy of the QM/MM edge region
division is a critical factor in ensuring calculation reliability.232
Employing QM/MM in combination with MD provides a
unique capability to investigate the dynamic process and
catalytic mechanism underlying enzymatic reactions.185
3.2.4. New Developments in Allosteric Pathway
Prediction. Enzymes often have multiple catalytic or active
regulatory sites, and binding of various regulatory factors to
these sites can modify the enzyme’s structure and function. In
order to investigate the conformational dynamics relevant to
protein function and study allosteric regulation, researchers can
utilize biophysical methods such as NMR, smFRET, long-term
MD, and various enhanced sampling algorithms.233−236 In
their work, Peng et al. reviewed new developments in NMR,
Markov state models (MSMs), information flow, and machine
learning.237 With the increase in computing power, it is
expected that the rational use of enhanced sampling and
machine learning will be a general trend for studying allosteric
regulation.238,239
Various emerging methods based on machine learning and
MD simulations can be used to explore allosteric regulation of
enzymes, as exemplified below:
(a) MSMs combined with MD simulations offer a state
connection diagram of the free-energy landscape, enabling
estimation of the allosteric effects of perturbations on
conformational equilibrium and meticulous description of the
kinetics of allosteric transitions.240 In this regard, trajectory
dimensionality reduction algorithms of Markov state models
play a decisive role in finding CVs to achieve high-quality
conformational predictions. Time-lagged independent component analysis (TICA) was initially developed for signal
processing241 and later employed as a MSMs preprocessing
step. For more on TICA and MSMs, see a recent review by
Frank Noé.242 Other dimensionality reduction techniques to
optimize CVs include the Skewed-Momenta method,243
Harmonic Linear Discriminant Analysis (HLDA),244 tSNE, 245 and Information Distilling of Metastability
(IDM).246 Dynamic nonequilibrium molecular dynamics (DNEMD) is a computational approach that accurately simulates
the nonequilibrium dynamic behavior of physicochemical
processes by introducing external nonequilibrium force fields.
By controlling the temperature, pressure, flow rate, and other
parameters of the system, this technique can simulate the
allosteric behavior of proteins under different environmental
conditions.247,248
(b) Accurately predicting the dynamic correlation between
amino acids is vital to forecast allosteric sites in a protein. One
way of achieving this is by analyzing multiple conformations in
MD simulations to obtain correlations between amino acids,
classified as covariance (Cij),249−253 or mutual information
(MI).254−259 MD simulations can be integrated with network
analysis to identify allosteric signaling pathways. It involves
9947

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.3c00042
Chem. Rev. 2023, 123, 9940−9981

Chemical Reviews

pubs.acs.org/CR

MD simulations.273 The allosteric regulation usually involves
μs−ms or even ms−s time scales (Figure 3).274−276 To identify

representing proteins as protein contact networks (PCNs) or
protein structure networks (PSNs) consisting of nodes (Cα or
amino acid centroids). Correlation between residues and key
functional centers are calculated to characterize the allosteric
signaling pathways. One such network analysis tool, webPSN
v2.0, combines an elastic network model (ENM) with normalmode analysis (NMA) to predict the collective motion in
protein systems, where the interactions between nodes are
approximated by Hooke’s harmonic potential.250 Dijkstra’s
algorithm260 is used to identify the shortest path between
nodes in amino acid networks and screened for allosteric paths.
This collective motion can also be described by an anisotropic
network model (ANM),261 and Lai et al. developed an ENMANM-based allosteric prediction method AlloType, which
predicted allosteric pathways with high accuracy.262 The
perturbation response sweep (PRS) can identify allosteric
sites by observing which residues, when given a slight
perturbation, cause a significant deformation in the entire
network.263−265
ENMs have the advantage of being faster for allosteric
prediction, but their scope is limited as they only analyze
protein backbone structural changes, ignoring details of protein
dynamic information, such as internal coordinates or torsional
changes in the two side chains and/or the main chain.
Alternatively, Dynamically Important Residue Networks
(DIRNs) serve to expand the analysis to capture protein
dynamic information from MD simulations, greatly improving
predictability.253 Compared with calculating covariance matrices, it may be more accurate to quantify amino acid
correlation and reveal the causal relationship in allosteric
communication using mutual information.266,267 The main
reason is that established methods of covariance matrices to
quantify correlations for MD simulations are limited to linear
correlations (eq 2), thus missing some of the correlations in
atomic fluctuations.268
Cij =

Figure 3. Time scales of different types of protein motions. These
motions include bond vibrations (10−100 fs), side chain rotations
(ps−μs), local domain fluctuations (ns−ms), allosteric transitions
(μs−s), and overall folding of protein structural motifs (μs−s). Each
of these movements precedes or accompanies chemical reactions.
Reproduced with permission from ref 276. Copyright 2015 American
Chemical Society.

the structure of homodimeric enzymes during the catalytic
process, enzyme kinetics and X-ray crystallography are often
used in combination with computational simulation. In
monitoring protein dynamics by NMR, it is crucial to
differentiate strictly between the impacts of fast local dynamics
(e.g., side chain rotation) and slow conformational exchange
dynamics (e.g., protein backbone movement) on enzyme
turnover. Incorporating machine learning can also unlock new
directions to gain insights into homodimeric enzyme catalytic
mechanisms.138

ri· rj

(

ri

2

rj

2

4. COOPERATIVITY OF HOMODIMERIC ENZYMES IN
SUBSTRATE BINDING
Ligand binding models in enzymatic catalysis have been
extensively studied over the years. The study of the binding
curve of hemoglobin and oxygen in 1960 marked the shift from
the hypothesis of “structure determines function” to the
“dynamic shift of protein conformation”.277 The initial lockkey model posited that the binding of the enzyme protein and
the ligand was a rigid matching, as if a lock and a key were
structurally matched.278 Nevertheless, recognizing the flexibility of the enzyme, the corresponding conformational
regulation mechanism was proposed: the binding process of
the ligand and the enzyme does not match exactly like a lock
and key, but the enzyme or ligand adjusts itself to the
appropriate conformation to bind the ligand or enzyme. It
should be noted that enzymes stabilize the transition-state
rather than the substrate, which is also the essence of enzyme
catalysis (see section 5.1), but this section only emphasizes the
cooperativity between subunits of homodimeric enzymes in
regards to ligand binding.

1/2

)

Review

(2)

where Δri and Δrj is the displacement of the Cα of the residue
i or j along the analyzed trajectory with respect to its position
at the most populated cluster.
The CONTACT method utilizes X-ray crystallography data
to fit up to four alternative conformations for each residue into
the electron density signature. It uses amino acids’ interatomic
overlap reduction to move them to alternative conformations
until no new conflicts are introduced. Amino acids located in
the path are potential allosteric sites.269
(c) However, MD simulations are unable to reach the
allosteric time scale, and other methods such as the Hessian
approach present difficulty in distinguishing causal relationships. Xu et al. utilized an emerging unsupervised neural
relational inference (NRI) model to learn MD trajectories of
biological macromolecules, describing allosteric processes as
dynamic networks of interacting residues.270 Although not
dominant in time, the NRI model can capture the allosteric
signal earlier before observing the complete conformational
transition. Recent studies have shown that coevolution
coupling analysis based on single structures can also identify
some key regions associated with enzymatic activity.271,272
The allosteric pathway has been an area of limited study due
to experimental limitations of detection and the time scale of

4.1. Single Ligand-Binding Models

4.1.1. Classical Allosteric Theories. Prior to discussing
the binding process of ligands to enzymes, it is important to
differentiate between single and dual ligand-binding processes.
Single ligand-binding is when each of the two active pockets of
the homodimeric enzyme binds to the same one ligand,
9948

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.3c00042
Chem. Rev. 2023, 123, 9940−9981

Chemical Reviews

pubs.acs.org/CR

whereas dual ligand-binding occurs when each pocket of the
homodimeric enzyme can bind to two different substrates.
Allosteric regulation has emerged as a powerful alternative
when discussing site-to-site cooperativity in homodimeric
enzyme or oligomeric enzyme. It has been dubbed the “second
secret of life,” after the genetic code, and holds far-reaching
research value.279 Two mechanisms, conformation selection
(Monod−Wyman−Changeux or MWC model)165,280 and
induced fit (Koshland−Némethy−Filmer or KNF model)281
were later proposed. Conformational selection emphasizes that
the ligand selectively binds to a few dominant conformations
that are similar to the substrate-binding state, while induced fit
focuses on ligands binding to enzymes randomly before
inducing conformational transition to an optimal state for
ligand-binding (see Figure 4). Kinetic studies suggest that

Review

discovered a new model coupling two mechanisms in the study
of flavodoxin’s binding to its cofactor flavin mononucleotide.288 Surprisingly, the predominant pathway of conformational selection transitioned to the induced fit model upon
increasing the ligand concentration.288 Furthermore, Mittermaier et al. compared the binding modes of two substrates,
paromomycin and acetyl coenzyme A (AcCoA), to aminoglycoside N-(6′)-acetyltransferase Ii (AAC(6’)-Ii). For ligand
paromomycin bound at the homodimer interface, the
conformational switch is similar to the conformational
selection model, while for ligand AcCoA bound at the distal
location, it is akin to the induced fit model.289 Transaldolase
from Thermoplasma acidophilum (Tac TAL), whose active
form is a decamer (dimer of homopentamers),290 acts on the
donor ketose D-6-phosphate fructose (F6P) and D-sedoheptulose-7-phosphate (S7P) and the acceptor aldose D-erythrose-4phosphate (E4P) and D-glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate (G3P) in
equilibrium reactions. This process involves two half-reactions:
the nucleophilic attack of the keto carbon (carbon 2) of the
donor ketose (F6P or S7P) by the ε-amino group of lysine and
the release of G3P (F6P as donor) or E4P (S7P as donor). In
the acceptor half-reaction, the C3 carbanion complements the
C1 of the aldose (G3P or E4P) to re-establish the iminium
form of F6P or S7P.291 Lehwess-Litzmann et al. examined a
series of TAL reaction intermediates, indicating that each
subunit could be open and closed in the apo state, whereas in
the pseudo-Menten complex (where citrate and glycerol mimic
supply ketose) in a closed conformation, which was consistent
with conformational selection. This conformational selection
may ensure that the donor ketose binds first and avoids the
formation of a stable, unproductive acceptor complex (E4P
binding).291 The specificity of the protein−ligand binding
model is related to the ligand’s binding position, the
concentration of the ligand, and the type of ligand/protein.
It is worth noting that the folding process in homodimeric
enzymes or oligomeric enzymes can be explained using
conformational selection, which is majorly enthalpy-driven.102
Additionally, both conformational selection and induced fit
mechanisms can aid in chemical steps, including substrate
dissociation and product release, among others.292 These two
mechanisms may be further distinguished structurally293 and
are crucial for understanding a range of biological processes,
such as the allosteric regulation in dimeric enzymes.294
Considering that homodimeric enzymes have multiple active
sites, it is crucial to take into account site-to-site effects, which
include but are not limited to changes in pocket structure and
substrate affinity. Besides the conformational selection and
induced fit models previously mentioned, a novel protein−
ligand allosteric binding mechanism (Hilser−Thompson or
HT model) can be used to explain the binding between
homodimeric enzymes and ligands (Figure 5).295 The HT
model postulates that proteins possess inherent disorder across
their structure, which results from a balance between protein
folding and unfolding. Consequently, multiple conformational
choices occur during the binding process between homodimeric enzymes and ligands. The most significant difference
between the conformational selection model and the HT
model is that whereas both involve the mutual transition and
equilibrium between conformations during the unbound state,
the former emphasizes the maintenance of symmetry between
the two subunits. Conversely, symmetry between protomers is
not necessarily necessary in the HT model during the process
of ligand binding.

Figure 4. Conformational selection (MWC) and induced fit (KNF)
models in monomers. The Conformation Selection model suggests
that before ligand binding, the receptor protein is in equilibrium with
several discrete conformations (E and E*), from which the ligand
selects the ideal conformation (E*) for binding. In contrast, the
Induced Fit model proposes that the receptor undergoes a
conformational transition only after binding the substrate. The ligand
first binds to the receptor in a nonideal conformation (L@E) and
then induces the receptor to transform into an ideal conformation
(L@E*); kr and k−r are the forward and backward rate constants of
conformational interconversion, kon and koff are the association and
dissociation rate constants of ligand binding, and [L] is the ligand
concentration.

conformational selection may be a more prevalent mechanism
for ligand binding to target proteins nowadays.282,283 Kinetic
experiments to distinguish this small difference rely on the “fast
equilibrium approximation” theory, which assumes that
substrate association and dissociation rates are quicker than
conformational motions, an assumption that holds in complex
biological systems.284 Thus, the first-order rate constants (kobs)
for conformational selection and induced fit can reasonably be
described.282
The debate regarding the conformational selection and
induced fit has persisted for 60 years. Both models are
applicable, and in some cases, a combination is required to
elucidate some enzymes. For instance, Edelstein et al.
designated the binding behavior of ligands to different
regulatory proteins, concluding that the conformational
selection mechanism accounts for the majority.285 Similarly,
Takada et al. postulated that protein binding the small ligands
occurs via conformational selection models, whereas proteins
binding macromolecules, like DNA, tend to fit induced
models.286 In a study of the noncovalent binding of ubiquitin
to proteins, Zagrovic et al. showed support for a combination
of two mechanisms. In the unbound/apo state, ubiquitin
selects for binding to the conformation closest to the bound
state and then slightly adjusts the binding interface through
induced fit to achieve a specific function.287 Likewise, Oas et al.
9949

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.3c00042
Chem. Rev. 2023, 123, 9940−9981

Chemical Reviews

pubs.acs.org/CR

Figure 5. MWC, KNF, and HT models in homodimeric enzymes.
Blue arrow and pink square represent binding-competent and
binding-incompetent subunits, respectively. (a) Conformational
selection model: If the initial equilibrium favors the blue double
arrow state, the binding is positive because the energy cost of the
transition from double pink squares to double blue arrows is paid for
by binding the first ligand but not the second. (b) Induced fit model:
If the transition from pink double squares to pink square/blue arrow
is energetically more favorable than from pink square/blue arrow to
double blue arrows, the binding is negative and the first ligand binds
more strongly than the second. The opposite is positive. (c) Hilser−
Thompson (HT) model: In this case, blue arrow and pink square
correspond to folded and unfolded states, respectively. Binding is
positively cooperative if the folding of one subunit promotes the
folding of the adjacent subunit. Conversely, binding is negatively
cooperative if folding of one subunit promotes unfolding of the
adjacent subunit.

Review

Figure 6. The dynamic energy landscape of DHFR during catalysis.
Ground-state and higher-energy structures of each cycle intermediate
were modeled based on published X-ray structures.303 NADPH and
NADP are shown in gold and substrates, products, and analogues in
magenta. Relaxation dispersion experiments showed that the higherenergy conformations of each intermediate were similar to the
ground-state conformations of adjacent intermediates. The rates of
interconversion, shown by black arrows, were also determined using
these experiments. Additionally, presteady-state enzyme kinetics at
298 K and pH = 6 were used to measure the rate constants for
interconversion between the complexes, indicated by red arrows.
Reproduced with permission from ref 156. Copyright 2006 American
Association for the Advancement of Science.

As most homodimeric enzymes contain multiple substrate
binding sites, such as catalytic and allosteric sites, the binding
process of ligands to these enzymes can be effectively
elucidated by the allosteric ensemble model.296 The binding
of a substrate to a subunit causes a conformational change
through protein fluctuations with the interior or exterior
environment, which consequently influences the conformation
of the adjacent subunit. Notably, this conformational transition
can significantly impact both catalysis and product release of
the adjacent subunit (see section 5 for more details).
Furthermore, Kamerlin et al. proposed that each enzyme
conformation has a distinct function, and new catalytic
conformations could be stabilized by a few distant
mutations.304 In the process of enzyme evolution, DE is a
powerful tool in enzyme engineering that can effectively
modify the sampling of conformational substates on various
time scales to optimize enzymes.305
4.1.3. The Thermodynamic Nature of Allostery and
Its Effect on Binding Affinity. Allostery is not merely a
conformational change but depends on both entropy and
enthalpy.306 Specifically, ligand binding on the protein alters its
enthalpy or conformational entropy, allowing allostery to
happen without significant conformational shifts. In the
groundbreaking research by Cooper and Dryden, ligand
binding changes the amplitude of thermal fluctuations around
the protein, rather than the conformation itself.307 The
characteristic of allosteric regulation without visible conformational alteration is the rebalancing of rigid and flexible regions
in proteins, which encompasses an “entropy-driven” system.308,309 For example, changes in conformational entropy
in cAMP-dependent protein kinase A (PKA-C) are distributed
globally throughout the enzyme.310 Additionally, the affinity of
the two subunits for the substrate can be analyzed using

4.1.2. Allosteric Ensemble Model Based on the
Thermodynamic Energy Landscape. There is growing
evidence that the conformation of enzymes is not restricted to
the binary states of open and closed. In 2014, Hilser et al.
proposed a new paradigm for allosteric regulation, inspired by
the intrinsic disorder and dynamics of enzymatic proteins.296
This model expands on the statistical properties of enzyme
conformational allostery and is hence referred to as the
allosteric ensemble model. Essentially, this paradigm highlights
that binding of an effector or ligand at one site redistributes the
energy landscape of the enzyme, thereby increasing or reducing
the probability of an open/active conformation at other sites
that can bind the ligand. Furthermore, this framework employs
the free energy landscape and combines the thermodynamic
view of conformational selection with induced fit, making it a
variation of the conformational selection mechanism beyond
the induced fit.
In recent years, various experimental evidence based on the
allosteric ensemble model surfaced.297−299 Zhang et al.
discovered that Ras proteins as classical members of small
GTPases possess inactive and active states, and the transitions
between these states are regulated by ligands or regulators.300
That is, various substates of Ras proteins are pre-existing,
including many low-energy inactive conformations but only
one active conformation.300 Such transitions between functional conformations are thought to occur through millisecond
fluctuations.301,302 Dynamic energy diagrams of Escherichia coli
dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) demonstrated the rebalancing of conformational ensembles during catalysis, as depicted
in Figure 6.156 These results provide substantial experimental
support for the allosteric ensemble theory.
9950

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.3c00042
Chem. Rev. 2023, 123, 9940−9981

Chemical Reviews

pubs.acs.org/CR

Review

structural and enzyme kinetic approaches, as detailed in section
3.
Kalodimos et al. determined that the affinity of cataboliteactivating protein (CAP) for DNA is affected by the
combination of conformational entropy and enthalpy (Figure
7).311 Some homodimeric enzymes cannot bind two substrates

Figure 8. Ping Pong and Theorell−Chance models for dual ligandbinding. S1 and S2 represent two substrates, while P1 and P2 denote
their corresponding products. E represents an enzyme.

mechanism, two substrates, 5-α-D-phoshorylribose 1-diphosphate (PRPP) and orotic acid (OA), are initially bound to one
subunit, with the formed products, nucleotide orotidine 5′phosphate (OMP) and diphosphate (PPi), stacked in the
reaction subunit. Upon the substrate binding to the adjacent
subunit, the corresponding products (PRPP corresponds to
OMP, OA corresponds to PPi) are released in the reaction
subunit, which forms alternating site catalysis (Figure 9).316,317

Figure 7. Effect of conformational entropy (−TΔSconf) and enthalpy
change (ΔH) on substrate affinity. The change in conformational
entropy can result in binding enhancement, binding inhibition or no
effect in the expected affinity, depending on the tendency for
enthalpy−entropy compensation.

at the same time, which could be unsupported thermodynamically. Levitzki and Hill estimated the steady-state behavior of
homodimeric enzyme in the E-ES or ES-ES state, concluding
that the ES-ES structure is less stable than the ES-E structure.
As a result, one subunit remains in a bound state, while the
other subunit oscillates between substrate-bound (ES) and
unbound states (E).312
4.2. Dual Ligand-Binding Models

Dual ligand-binding occurs when both subunits of a
homodimeric enzyme, or other oligomeric enzymes, possess
the ability to bind two different substrates, allowing for the
release of two different products. While these ligands follow
the models described above when binding to the enzyme’s
catalytic pocket, emphasis is placed in the sequence of
substrate binding and product release.
Two main models, the Ping Pong model313 and Theorell−
Chance model,314 will be discussed in this section. The Ping
Pong model focuses on the sequential process of substrate
binding and product release during enzyme catalysis. This
model involves the binding and catalysis of the first substrate,
followed by the release of the first product. After the second
substrate binds to the second catalytic pocket, the second
product is released.313 In contrast, the Theorell−Chance
model differs from the Ping Pong model in the order of
substrate binding and product release. In this model, all
substrates are bound and catalyzed initially. Once the second
substrate binds, the first product is immediately released in a
fast reaction while the second product is released in a slow
reaction (rate-determining step), as shown in Figure 8.315
McClard et al. introduced a more complex “double
Theorell−Chance” mechanism, as evidenced by kinetic results
for the homodimeric enzyme, orotate phosphoribosyltransferase (OPRTase) from Saccharomyces cerevisiae.316 In this

Figure 9. The Double Theorell−Chance model in OPRTase.
Substrates PRPP and OA initially bind to the subunit B (known as
site B). Afterward, the reaction subunit holds the formed products,
including OMP and PPi. Upon binding of the subsequent substrate to
an adjacent subunit (site A), the products will become progressively
released.

To summarize, the binding of a first ligand to one catalytic
site of an enzyme can cause allostery that either promotes or
inhibits the binding affinity of the second ligand to the other
active site, with or without a conformational change.
Furthermore, various homodimeric enzymes exhibit distinct
functional motions, which go beyond being categorized as
active or inactive. Consequently, multiple models must be
considered, along with the appropriate mechanisms used to
elaborate on specific enzyme systems.
However, a critical issue under debate is the relationship
(promotion/inhibition/sequential) between fast local dynamics and slow conformational exchange dynamics318 and the
influence of fast dynamics on enzyme function, particularly in
stabilizing the transition state, remains unclear.131,132 Wright
and colleagues made a remarkable discovery wherein they
developed E. coli DHFR mutants that eradicated millisecond
fluctuations in the enzyme’s active site without disrupting its
9951

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.3c00042
Chem. Rev. 2023, 123, 9940−9981

Chemical Reviews

pubs.acs.org/CR

structure and electrostatic preorganization. The dynamic
knockout significantly impaired hydride transfer. Thus, there
is a potential link between conformational fluctuations on the
millisecond time scale and the chemical step of an enzymatic
reaction.319 Understanding this relationship between “fast” and
“slow” motions and their impact on catalysis is crucial for
comprehending the catalytic mechanism and enzyme evolution.302 Indeed, the “slow” motions have garnered significant
interest in recent times, primarily because several enzymes
undergo substantial conformational changes during their
catalytic cycle.129,130,320,321 Additionally, allostery can be
manifested not only in binding affinity but also in essential
steps such as catalysis and product release (discussed in section
5).

Review

driving force for catalysis, hence causing ground-state
destabilization.341
The catalytic properties of homodimeric enzymes cannot be
entirely explained by biophysical models. For instance, many
homodimeric enzymes exhibit half reactivity, characterized by
conformational fluctuations and energy transfer’s involvement.
However, the molecular mechanism and biological significance
of half reactivity remain unclear. This phenomenon implies
that in dimeric enzymes’ catalytic process, only one catalytic
site or subunit binds the substrate and participates in catalysis,
while the other catalytic site undergoes either of the following:
(1) inability to bind the substrate or (2) binding the substrate
but inability to perform the catalytic function. This theory
emerged in the 1970s and is still applicable today.342 Half
reactivity holds for various homodimeric enzymes, including
AP,343 fluoroacetic acid dehalogenase (FAcD),344 pyruvate
dehydrogenase complex E1,345 biotin carboxylase (BC),346,347
SARS 3C-like proteinase,348 thymidylate synthase (TS),349−352
dihydroorotate dehydrogenase A (DHODA),353 cytochrome
bc1 complex, 3 5 4 Asp semialdehyde dehydrogenase
(ASADH),355 transketolase (TK),356 F420H2:NADP+ oxidoreductase (Fno),357 and others.
In the field of enzyme catalysis, an increase in catalytic
efficiency resulting from a particular “action” suggests “positive
cooperativity.” Conversely, the term “negative cooperativity” is
used when it reduces enzymatic activity.358 Half reactivity may
be owing to intersubunit cooperativity. Specifically, the
noncatalytic subunit may be affected by the catalytic subunit
and be unable to bind a substrate and catalyze, or promote the
catalysis through positive cooperativity when it binds a
substrate. Although several seminal works describe the
mechanisms of cooperativity and provides examples of negative
and positive cooperativity, the summary is not exhaustive.
Therefore, we provide a detailed description of the molecular
mechanism of negative cooperativity and positive cooperativity
in dimeric enzymes and emphasize the significance of positive
cooperativity in dimeric enzyme catalysis.

5. COOPERATIVITY AND DYNAMICS OF
HOMODIMERIC ENZYMES IN CATALYSIS
5.1. Theories and Advancements in Enzyme Catalysis

Enzyme catalysis relies on the transition state theory, which
was proposed by Pauling.322,323 According to this theory,
enzymes have a higher affinity to the transition state compared
to the ground state, and the catalytic capability of an enzyme
originates from its stabilizing effect on the transition state. The
stabilization is achieved by providing a unique electrostatic
environment324 that helps to complete the orientation of
catalytic groups, proton transfer, metal localization, and
formation of covalent intermediates. As a result, enzymes are
capable of exerting powerful catalytic effects. Additionally,
transition state analogue structures have been designed to
inhibit enzymes. Examples of such inhibitors include
phosphokinase,325,326 phosphorylase,327,328 synthase,329 hydrolase,330,331 transferase,332−334 and metalloenzyme335 (Figure
10). Theoretical elaboration of enzymes to accelerate

5.2. Negative Cooperativity between Subunits

One subunit of the homodimeric enzyme cannot bind
substrate, likely due to conformational differences between
the subunits. In many cases, negative cooperativity is a
common phenomenon in homodimeric enzymes, and adjacent
subunits may maintain conformational asymmetry through
dynamic adjustment of the subunit−subunit interface.343,359−362 Additionally, Koshland et al. first reviewed the
molecular mechanisms of negative cooperativity in 1971,
including enzymes with this property, only 10 examples were
provided.363 Four main approaches to explaining negative
cooperativity are shown in Figure 11: (a) two monomers
possessing different catalytic activities combine to form a
heterodimeric enzyme with structural and functional asymmetry, (b) the subunits of a homodimer are identical, although
one site deforms and loses the ability to bind when
asymmetrically associated, (c) the two substrate binding
pockets are too close together after homodimerization, causing
steric hindrance, and (d) binding of a ligand produces a
conformational change that alters the empty subunit, making it
incapable of binding the substrate.363
However, models based solely on the binding pocket do not
seem to fully capture the conformational motions resulting
from homodimerization. Instead, studies utilizing allosteric
ensemble models suggest that enzymatic protein conforma-

Figure 10. Schematic diagram of enzyme transition state theory and
inhibitor design of enzyme transition state analogues (TSID). The
transition state structure can bind more efficiently to the catalytic
pocket of an enzyme than the substrate. Creating structural analogues
based on the transition state is feasible for generating comparable
inhibitors.

biochemical reactions includes various aspects such as near
attack conformation,336 entropic contributions,337 ground-state
destabilization,338 enzyme dynamics,320,321 and so on. Each of
these ideas has their scope of applicability and controversy, as
discussed by Warshel et al. on entropic contributions339 and
enzyme dynamics in enzyme catalysis.131,132 Ground-state
destabilization is a term used when catalytic residues interact
with a substrate, causing it to deviate from its lowest-energy
conformation such as bond elongation.340 Tittmann et al.
investigated the origin of the catalytic ability of orotidine-5′monophosphate decarboxylase (OMPDC) using ultrahighresolution X-rays. The study reveals that although enzymes are
capable of physically distorting the substrate OMP, the
previously proposed electrostatic repulsion of the catalytic
site from the substrate carboxylate leaving group is not the
9952

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.3c00042
Chem. Rev. 2023, 123, 9940−9981

Chemical Reviews

pubs.acs.org/CR

Figure 11. Several mechanisms of negative cooperativity in dimeric
enzymes. (a) Nonidentical subunits have different sites, (b) subunits
are identical, but upon an asymmetric association to form a dimer one
of the sites is deformed, (c) adjacent sites are blocked by the first
substrate through steric effects, and (d) the binding of one ligand
induces a conformational change which alters the empty site so that it
cannot bind substrate.

Review

Figure 12. Biological properties of positive cooperativity in dimeric
enzymes. (1) In the absence of substrate binding, both subunits of the
homodimeric enzyme remain active. (2) Upon binding of substrate to
subunit A, subunit B serves as a regulatory subunit to compensate for
the entropy decrease caused by substrate binding to subunit A. (3)
Despite being noncatalytic, subunit B enhances subunit A’s catalysis
through allosteric regulation. (4) The coupling of product release
from subunit A with substrate binding on subunit B can significantly
decrease the time needed for both processes. (5) Finally, after product
release, subunit B transforms into an active catalytic site.

tional changes are complex and global in nature, which are
necessary for maintaining optimal activity at the catalytic
site.364,365 Moreover, there has been little discussion regarding
the biological significance of these models. We speculate that
this may be more prevalent in regulatory proteins, such as
those that can be activated or inhibited described in section
2.4, or in nuclear receptor proteins responsible for ensuring
substrate recognition.366−368

5.3.1. Empty Subunit Dynamics. One subunit binds the
ligand first while the other remains empty. However, the role
of the empty subunit in homodimeric enzyme is not yet clear
due to the lack of experimental evidence. FAcD from
Rhodopseudomonas palustris, a homodimeric enzyme that can
decompose C−F bonds using the catalytic triplet Asp110His155-His280, despite the high bond energy of 130 kcal
mol−1. Defluorination catalyzed by FAcD starts with Asp110
attacking the Cα atom of substrates, such as fluoroacetic acid
(FAc), resulting in cleavage of the C−F bond, detachment of
F- from the substrate, and formation of glycolic acid
(GoA).373−375 Pai et al. found that the empty subunit of
FAcD plays a role in “entropy increase” and “conformational
selection” during the catalytic process when the catalytic
subunit binds a substrate (Figure 13).14 The empty subunit
can release water molecules and exhibit larger conformational
fluctuations to increase entropy, which could potentially

5.3. Positive Cooperativity between Subunits

Recent years have seen a substantial expansion in the
understanding of half reactivity. While it is understandable
that binding of a ligand to one subunit may result in weakened
or even complete loss of the other subunit’s ability to bind, it is
perplexing that both subunits can bind the substrate, while
ultimately acting as half reactivity. This suggests that the ability
of the enzyme to bind and catalyze the substrate may not be
fully correlated.
Conversely, research on positive cooperativity between
subunits has highlighted the correlation of substrate binding,
catalysis, and product release. Anashkin et al. studied the
cooperativity of homodimeric membrane-bound inorganic
pyrophosphatase (mPPase) from Desulfitobacterium haf niensee,
suggesting that while ligand binding is negative cooperativity,
the binding energy can be stored as conformational strain
energy in the neighboring subunit, providing the driving force
for ion transfer and efficient product release in the catalytic
subunit.369 Importantly, Agnieszka Bzowska and colleagues
reviewed the occurrence of cooperativity in homodimer
enzymes, proposing that the adjacent subunit plays a crucial
regulatory role in the catalytic process.370 Based on these
findings, we propose an improved model that summarizes the
three key biological properties of positive cooperativity
between subunits, as shown in Figure 12: empty subunit
dynamics, improved catalytic efficiency, and substrate binding
coupled with product release (alternating catalytic sites). It
should be noted that the cooperative catalysis described here
differs from synergistic catalysis, which utilizes several catalytic
groups in enzymes to enhance catalytic activity and stereoselectivity.371,372

Figure 13. Schematic diagram of the empty subunit dynamics in
FAcD (PDB 6QHS). The empty subunit of FAcD can compensate for
the entropy decrease that occurs when the adjacent subunit binds to a
substrate through increased local dynamics and the release of water.
9953

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.3c00042
Chem. Rev. 2023, 123, 9940−9981

Chemical Reviews

pubs.acs.org/CR

compensate for the entropy decrease during substrate binding.
Conformational selection refers to the empty subunit’s
preference for transferring to the next conformation along
the reaction coordinate pathway. It then passes this state to the
catalytic subunit via an intersubunit conformational transition.
At higher substrate concentrations, both subunits can bind
substrate. However, this results in reduced local dynamics of
the empty subunit, which reduces its ability to compensate for
the increased entropy during substrate binding. A (K152I)
mutation at the subunit−subunit interface can lessen the
dynamic effect of the empty subunit, thereby reducing its
catalytic rate.376 Advancement in time-resolved crystallography149 has led to the resolution of more crystal structures. The
dynamic effect of empty subunits may relate to the interface
water network, where water molecules play a significant role in
response to conformational changes.344 Thus, empty subunit
dynamics during catalysis may bestow an advantage to dimeric
enzymes over monomeric ones. Although this study has drawn
attention to the empty subunit dynamics, some uncertainties
about FAcD still need further investigation. For example, (1)
the genuine catalytic substrate of FAcD remains unclear, as the
kinetics suggest that aromatic substrates with larger spaces are
more reactive than FAc, which is the natural substrate with
smaller spaces,377,378 (2) whether empty subunit dynamics
facilitate transition state stability necessitates further research,
and (3) mutations like K152I may lead to changes in the
catalytic pocket electrostatic environment and preorganization
capabilities, which may be the direct cause of catalytic impact,
rather than empty subunit dynamics.
5.3.2. Improving Catalytic Efficiency. section 2
describes dimerization as an evolutionary strategy for efficient
catalysis and high enzyme stability. Potentially, the high
catalytic efficiency relative to the monomer can be achieved
through the following mechanisms:
Structurally significant features:
(1) Allosteric regulation of the noncatalytic subunit (e.g.,
substrate binding)
(2) One subunit for substrate recognition, while the other
for catalysis
(3) Subunit channels are formed between subunits
Or structurally insignificant features:
(4) Favorable electrostatic environment is formed at the
interface and near the catalytic pocket
(5) More favorable hydrogen bond network via proton wires
or water molecular chains
(6) Electron transfer between subunits
(7) Heat capacity reduction mechanism
5.3.2.1. Allosteric Regulation of the Noncatalytic Subunit.
When both subunits bind substrate, the catalytic turnover rate
is different from that of a single subunit bound to substrate.
Although in most cases the phenomenon of both subunits
binding to the substrate occurs at higher substrate concentrations and usually manifests as substrate inhibition, i.e.,
reduced catalytic efficiency, a few enzymes also exhibit
substrate activation depending on the enzyme and substrate
type.
For example, 5′-methylthioadenosine/S-adenosylhomocysteine nucleosidase from Staphylococcus aureus (SaMTAN), a
homodimer that catalyzes the N-ribosidic bonds of 5′methylthioadenosine (MTA) and S-adenosylhomocysteine
(SAH) to form adenine and 5-thioribosyl groups, demonstrates
this phenomenon.379 When only one catalytic site of SaMTAN

Review

is occupied by substrate, the catalytic rate is slower despite the
high first site affinity (0.1 μM), enabling the enzyme to
catalyze MTA and SAH. At substrate concentrations above 1
μM, both sites become occupied, allowing the enzyme to
remove substrate from the first site more quickly. The second
site can only continue the reaction once the product is released
from the first site (Figure 14). Xanthine oxidase (XO), which

Figure 14. Catalytic site cooperativity in dimeric SaMTAN. At higher
substrate concentrations (above 1 μM), the second site was also filled
and the enzyme could remove substrate at the first site at a higher
rate.

comprises two identical subunits, catalyzes substrates like 6formylpterin (6FP) and xanthine. Tai et al. established that
there is cooperativity in binding and catalysis between subunits
of XO and that when both active sites bind 6FP, the turnover
rate is 2.95-fold faster as compared to when only a single site
binds 6FP.380 When xanthine is present in one active site, the
rate of oxidation of 6FP is increased, but the turnover rate of
xanthine is slowed down.381 Based on these experimental
findings, the hypothesis that these two subunits catalyze
independently is overturned. Furthermore, it is not uncommon
for both subunits to bind substrates, although only one of them
participates in the reaction, such as FAcD 14,376 and
hTS.350−352 The turnover rate is modulated by the adjacent
noncatalytic subunit through allosteric regulation, which is
largely attributed to the conformational differences between
the subunits.
5.3.2.2. One Site for Substrate Recognition, the Other for
Catalysis. Adenosine deaminases acting on RNA (ADARs) are
enzymes that convert adenosine to inosine in duplex RNA with
a C-terminal deaminase domain and double-stranded RNA
binding domains (dsRBDs).382 Beal et al. reported that human
ADAR2 fragments form an asymmetric dimer interface,
including protein−protein and protein−RNA interactions.368
This dimerization facilitates one of the deaminase domains to
directly participate in adenosine deamination catalysis, while
the other subunit allows for its dsRBD to approach the RNA
duplex. Specifically, one subunit is involved in RNA
recognition, while the other subunit performs catalysis, as
shown in Figure 15.368 A similar functional division between
subunits was found in other DNA and RNA modifying
enzymes, such as Mettl3/14 methyltransferase,383,384 APOBEC3A (A3A), a member of the human APOBEC3 family of
proteins,385 and human tRNA methyltransferase Trm6/61.386
In contrast to the asymmetric dimers present in ADAR and
Mettl3/14 crystal structures, Trm6 and Trm61 create a dimer
of dimers, in which Trm61 plays a catalytic role and Trm6
primarily functions as an RNA-binding scaffold.386 These
experiments further our understanding of substrate recognition
9954

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.3c00042
Chem. Rev. 2023, 123, 9940−9981

Chemical Reviews

pubs.acs.org/CR

Review

phan and water.390 This substrate channel is conserved even in
the ancestral tryptophan synthase, thus ensuring its high
catalytic efficiency.391
The substrate channel has also been found in the
homodimeric demethylase JMJD1A. This enzyme specifically
targets the Lys-9 in histone H3 (H3K9) and efficiently
removes its mono- and bimethylation (H3K9me1 and
H3K9me2) and acts as a coactivator of the androgen
receptor.392 Significantly, the enzymatic activity of two-step
demethylation is significantly reduced by mutation of one
active site in the JMJD1A dimer. Thus, a substrate channel
model has been proposed, facilitating the transfer of the
intermediate me1 to the adjacent subunit through a substrate
channel. This approach prevents the inappropriate chromatin
structure changes that may result from releasing the
monomethylated intermediate prematurely (see Figure 17).393

Figure 15. Different functions of the two subunits in the human
ADAR2 fragment (PDB E488QA). dsRBD2 A is not shown in the
structure, where dsRBD2 B is responsible for substrate recognition
and the adjacent deaminase A is responsible for catalysis.

through dimerization, particularly for enzymes involved in
genetic modification, which will facilitate progress in
biomedicine development.
5.3.2.3. Substrate Channels between Subunits. Enzymes
can use substrate channels to transfer their products directly to
adjacent enzymes or cells. This phenomenon is commonly
observed in multienzyme catalysis that can accelerate reactions
and prevent the production of unstable intermediates.387,388
For instance, imidazole glycerol phosphate synthase (HisFH)
from Thermotoga maritima, a heterodimeric bienzyme complex,
comprises the HisF and HisH subunits. HisH is responsible for
hydrolyzing glutamine (Gln) into glutamate (Glu) and
ammonia, then the ammonia migrates over 25 Å through the
central tunnel of the HisF β-strand barrel to the active site of
the HisF cyclase (Figure 16).389 There, it reacts with N′-[(5′-

Figure 17. Substrate channel in dimeric H3K9-specific demethylase
JMJD1A. Following the conversion of me2 to me1 at the first site, the
intermediate me1 passes through the substrate channel and is carried
to the second site. At the second site, me1 is subsequently
demethylated to me0.

5.3.2.4. More Favorable Electrostatic Environment.
Homodimeric enzymes exhibit high catalytic efficiency due
to positive cooperativity among subunits. Although some
molecular mechanisms can be identified through obvious
conformational changes, others, such as favorable electrostatic
environments, proton wires, and electron transfer, cannot be
easily distinguished conformationally. To fully comprehend
these aspects of catalysis, comprehensive biophysical and
modeling approaches are indispensable.
Alexov et al. identified the importance of formation of an
electrostatic funnel that directs substrates to the active center
of spermine synthase.394 Based on this study, Li et al.
conducted research on the electrostatic properties of numerous
homodimeric proteins.395 Homodimerization often leads to
the strongest electrostatic potentials at or near the dimer
interface, known as “electrostatic enhancement.″ Approximately 50% of the cases reveal the highest negative potential
at or near the interface, and about 45% have the highest
positive potential near the interface (Figure 18). This
electrostatic enhancement could facilitate substrate delivery
to active sites or improve molecular recognition, therefore
enhancing catalytic efficiency, a hypothesis supported by
several experimental studies.396,397 Furthermore, the transport
efficiency of the substrate is also affected by the channel length,
curve, gate, bottleneck, and water environment.
5.3.2.5. More Favorable Hydrogen Bond Network.
Efficient catalysis by homodimeric enzymes can be facilitated
by establishing a more favorable hydrogen bond network
between catalytic pockets, which can be accomplished via
proton transfer or relocation of water molecules.
Proton wires, consisting of specific amino acids and water
molecules, aid in the transfer of protons between subunits,
resulting in more favorable catalytic environments. This
mechanism plays a crucial role in the fundamental steps of
enzymatic catalysis and can additionally induce alternate site

Figure 16. Substrate channel in HisFH. The initial reaction takes
place in HisH, with ammonia then passing to HisF. In the latter, it
reacts with PrFAR to form the final product. On the right, it shows the
catalytic triad structure seen during the conversion of glutamine by
HisH. Reproduced with permission from ref 389. Copyright 2021
Springer Nature.

phosphoribulosyl)formimino]-5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide ribonucleotide (PrFAR) to generate histidine precursor
imidazole glycerol phosphate (ImGP) and purine precursor 5aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide ribonucleotide (AICAR). Another example is the αββα tryptophan synthase complex,
which is responsible for the final two steps in tryptophan
biosynthesis. The α subunit cleaves indole-3-glycerophosphate
(IGP) aldehyde to generate glyceraldehyde 3-phosphoric acid
(GAP) and indole. The latter is then transported through an
intermolecular 25 Å long hydrophobic tunnel to the active site
of the adjacent β subunit, where it condenses with L-serine in a
pyridoxal 5′-phosphate (PLP)-dependent reaction to trypto9955

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.3c00042
Chem. Rev. 2023, 123, 9940−9981

Chemical Reviews

pubs.acs.org/CR

Review

These HBs are typically formed between functional groups
with comparable pKa and are shorter, around ∼2.5 Å in length,
compared to standard hydrogen bonds (HBs) with a
heteroatom distance of 2.8−3.0 Å.405 Despite their initial
proposal, there is a debate over the contribution of LBHBs to
enzymatic catalysis. Cleland and Kreevoy, as well as Frey et al,
argue that LBHBs have a high stabilizing effect on the
transition state, up to 15−20 kcal mol−1.403,404 On the other
hand, Warshel, Schutz, and Ash et al. believe that LBHBs may
not even exist in solution,406,407 and they may be ineffective, or
even anticatalytic, for the stabilization of transition state.408
Kemp et al. conducted a comprehensive review of the
controversies surrounding the structure identification and
catalytic mechanism of LBHBs.405 It is undeniable that
LBHBs greatly impact the catalytic efficiency of enzymes in
some enzyme systems,409−411 although they may not
necessarily stabilize transition states.
These short HBs are also present in dimeric enzymes,
communicating between the two subunits in the form of
atomistic Newton’s cradles by switching between low-barrier
hydrogen bonds and ordinary hydrogen bonds. Tittmann et al.
reported that the binding of the ThDP to a subunit resulted in
the repositioning of normal hydrogen bonds to LBHBs,
facilitated by a “swinging” water molecule and an “uneven
proton” on Asp165.411 The resulting exchange of catalytic
activity between sites, as shown in Figure 19. The catalytic
activity of homodimeric enzymes disappears when specific
amino acids are mutated, leading to the conversion of LBHBs
back to normal hydrogen bonds. Thus, LBHBs have an
important role in facilitating efficient communication between
catalytic sites.411 Homodimeric orotidine-5′-monophosphate
decarboxylase (OMPDC) is a key enzyme in the de novo
biosynthesis of pyrimidine nucleotides by catalyzing the
decarboxylation of orotidine-5′-monophosphate (OMP) to
uridine-5′-monophosphate (UMP). Rindfleisch et al. reported
that when the substrate OMP binds to the enzyme, a strong
hydrogen bond (2.53 Å) forms between the substrate
carboxylate and Asp312 residue.341 A steady-state kinetic
analysis, with the aid of ITC, demonstrated positive

Figure 18. Favorable electrostatic environment and electrostatic
funneling in dimeric proteins. Throughout the entire protein data set,
the maximum electrostatic potential can be situated in any area of the
protein. Nevertheless, nearly 50% of the maximum negative potentials
and 45% of the maximum positive potentials are at or near the
interface.

catalysis between subunits.398,399 Pyruvate dehydrogenase
(PDH) complex E1 is a typical enzyme utilizing the pingpong mechanism with thiamine diphosphate (ThDP) as the
activator. Its catalysis of two substrates, pyruvate and a lipoyl
group attached to a pendant protein domain of E2 from the
PDH multienzyme complex, is driven by proton wires.400
Specifically, the decarboxylation of pyruvate at one catalytic
site activates the second site via proton wires, resulting in high
efficiency comparable to that of an engine piston.400 Tittmann
et al. discovered reversible proton transfer as a common feature
of ThDP-dependent enzymes while analyzing three ThDPdependent enzymes, namely, the E. coli E1 component of the
pyruvate dehydrogenase complex, E. coli acetohydroxyacid
synthase isoenzyme I, and the Lactobacillus plantarum pyruvate
oxidase through NMR and ITC techniques.401 Additionally, a
long proton wire with linear water chains was identified at the
interface of tetrameric phosphatidyl glycerol phosphatase
(PGPase), which could potentially exchange protons between
subunits and achieve coupling between catalytic sites.402
Some short hydrogen bonds are present in many enzyme
systems, and Cleland and Kreevoy403 and Frey404 et al.
described them as low-barrier hydrogen bonds (LBHBs).

Figure 19. Active-site communication in the dimeric transketolase through the proton wire. This mechanism links and coordinates the catalysis of
two distant active sites within the dimer. After the product releases from one active site, it triggers substrate binding at the second site of the dimer
through proton exchange and reciprocal interconversion between the AP and IP tautomers of enzyme-bound ThDP in both active sites. The
LBHBs are key determinants of the wire, ensuring fast back-and-forth oscillations of the transmitted proton through the wire. Reproduced with
permission from ref 411. Copyright 2019 Springer Nature.
9956

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.3c00042
Chem. Rev. 2023, 123, 9940−9981

Chemical Reviews

pubs.acs.org/CR

cooperativity with a Hill coefficient of 2.0 during OMPDC
catalysis.341
The protonation state of amino acids and the localization of
water molecules are key factors in the reconstruction of the
hydrogen bond network. Bacterial heptose isomerase (GmhA)
is a tetramer, with its sugar isomerase domain (SIS) forming a
dimer and associating with another dimer. Harmer et al., using
Proflex,412 measured the global hydrogen bond network of
GmhA and discovered that the catalytic pocket zinc of the
second dimer showed greater stability and higher Lewis acidity,
causing improved substrate affinity when the second substrate
attached to the second dimer of GmhA rather than binding to
another subunit.413 An example of this is 5′-methylthioadenosine nucleosidase, where the reaction can only proceed once
D198 has been protonated.414,415
The chemical basis for coupling catalytic sites in some
homodimeric enzymes is the remodeling of hydrogen bond
networks, which is related to the pH of amino acids in the
proton wire, number of water molecules, and channel
distance.416 It is believed that other dimeric enzymes also
have similar proton wire communication mechanisms, and the
role of LBHBs in catalysis requires further investigation.
5.3.2.6. Electron Transfer. Furthermore, electron transfer
occurs in dimeric enzymes regardless of significant conformational differences. Oxidoreductases like alkyl hydroperoxide
reductase Ahp1,417 cytochrome c nitrite reductase,418,419 and
sulfhydryl oxidase Erv1420 are known to have a higher
incidence of electron transfer. Dimerization or oligomerization
enhances electron transfer pathways which ensure normal
catalytic progress. Various models are available that illustrate
the intricate mechanism of allosteric communication among
cytochrome bc1 subunits, with heme bL−bL electron transfer
being vital for catalysis. Figure 20 shows that the heme bL−bL
bridge allows the transfer of electrons from the lower potential
chain in the damaged protomer to the other normal protomer
when it is functionally connected to the undamaged
monomer.421 It should be noted that cytochrome c nitrite
reductase from Shewanella oneidensis (soNrfA) is a dimeric
enzyme containing five c-heme per protomer for six-electron
reduction of nitrite and hydroxylamine two-electron reduction.
Judd et al. investigated the catalytic properties of soNrfA
during the conversion of nitrite and hydroxylamine by means
of protein film voltammetry (PFV).419 The results suggest that
potential pathways of communication exist between the
individual soNrfA monomers during catalysis.419 Protoncoupled electron transfer (PCET) is frequently applied to
account for various proton and electron transfer pathways,
where electron transfer is coupled with proton transfer.422
5.3.2.7. Heat Capacity Reduction Mechanism. The
positive cooperativity of dimerization on substrate binding
can be measured by techniques such as ITC, and its favorable
effect on catalysis can be demonstrated through the heat
capacity reduction mechanism.423 The Macromolecular rate
theory (MMRT), which Schipper and co-workers proposed,
originally explained the temperature dependence of enzymatic
catalysis.423,424 In the 19th century, the relationship between
temperature and chemical reaction rates was initially described
by the Arrhenius equation: k = Ae−EA/RT, where k is the rate
constant, A is the pre-exponential factor/Arrhenius constant,
EA is the activation energy of the reaction, R is the universal gas
constant, and T is the temperature. At the start of the 20th
century, Ayling and Polanyi extended the Arrhenius equation
and developed the transition state theory. They introduced

Review

Figure 20. Various possible electron transfer pathways in Cytbc1-like
complexes. (A) Native-like system with all four branches active (B−
B). (B−E) Asymmetric forms containing one or more mutations
inactivating either the Qo site (Cytb: RhG158W; designated as WB) or
heme bH (Cytb: RhH212N; designated as BN): WB−B, one lower
branch inactivated; NB−B, one upper branch inactivated; WNB−B,
upper and lower branch on the same side inactivated; WB−BN, crossinactivated enzyme. Reproduced from ref 421. Copyright 2021
American Chemical Society.

Boltzmann and Planck constants (kB, h), transport coefficients
(κ, here = 1Vfor simplicity) and the Gibbs free energy
difference between the ground and transition states (ΔG⧧, eq 3
and 4). ΔCP⧧ (the difference in heat capacity between the
ground state and the transition state at constant pressure)
quantifies the temperature dependence of ΔG⧧. Thus, the
temperature dependence of the reaction rate is portrayed by eq
5:
k=

kBT G /RT
e
h

ik T y
ln(k) = lnjjjj B zzzz
k h {

(3)

[ G ]
RT

(4)

[ HT0 + CP (T
ik T y
ln(k) = lnjjjj B zzzz
RT
k h {
[ ST0 + CP ln(T /T0)]
+
R

T0)]

(5)

where T0 is a reference temperature, and HT0 and ST0 are
the difference in enthalpy and entropy between the ground
state and the transition state at T0, respectively.
This theory emphasizes that the heat capacity of the enzyme
changes throughout the reaction coordinates, and that the heat
capacity of the transition state will be much lower than that of
other intermediates, as shown in Figure 21, i.e., CP⧧(TS) <
CP⧧(ES).425 ΔCP⧧ reflects statistical thermodynamic properties
and can be determined experimentally327 or by calculating
9957

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.3c00042
Chem. Rev. 2023, 123, 9940−9981

Chemical Reviews

pubs.acs.org/CR

meric enzymes are believed to achieve increased efficiency due
to their negative heat capacity, where negative contributions
spread far away their active center. However, the negative
influence on heat capacity exerted by the distal domain in
monomeric enzymes cannot compete with that of homodimeric enzymes.
5.3.3. Substrate Binding Coupled with Product
Release and Alternating Catalytic Sites. When a catalytic
subunit forms a product, its neighboring subunits may
allosterically promote product release by, for example, binding
to a substrate, or product release facilitates catalysis of the
noncatalytic subunit. In dimeric enzymes, product release is
closely linked to substrate binding of adjacent subunits,
resulting in significant time savings and favorable catalysis.
5.3.3.1. Antisymmetric Motion Coupling of Substrate
Binding and Product Release. In certain cases, the binding of
substrates and cofactors can promote the release of products.
For instance, E. coli dihydrofolate reductase also employs an
allosteric pathway, with the cofactor NADPH promoting the
release of the product.430 Meanwhile, in dimeric enzymes,
allosteric coupling between subunits is often manifested by
conformational differences, such as one subunit closing to bind
the substrate while the other opens to release the product. As
shown in the literature, many enzymes follow this pattern,
including acetate kinase,431 biotin carboxylase,346,347 SaMTAN,379 mercuric reductase,432 NADH oxidase in Enterococcus
faecalis,433 and SET protein.434,435 The DcpS scavenger
decapping enzyme serves as an example, wherein one active
site closes and the other opens, allowing for the association of
substrate binding and product release (Figure 23).2 Another
example is SaMTAN, wherein the second site substrate can
only participate in the reaction following the release of the first
site product, which is mediated by the 104 loop motion.379
The two subunits of acetate kinase consistently follow an
open/closed asymmetric state in catalysis, potentially correlating substrate binding with product release.431
5.3.3.2. In Some Oligomeric Enzymes and Regulatory
Proteins. This coupling phenomenon is also present in some
regulatory proteins and oligomeric enzymes.370,434,436,437
Pyruvate carboxylase (PC) exists as a tetramer, each protomer
containing four major domains, where each protomer produces
two distinct catalytic faces.438 Experiments showed that when
pyruvate binds to the carboxytransferase (CT) domain of PC,

Figure 21. Basis of a negative ΔCP⧧. (a) Conceptual depiction of a
difference in CP between the enzyme−substrate (E−S) and enzyme−
transition state (E−TS) complexes, resulting in a negative ΔCP⧧. (b)
Conceptual depiction of differences in enthalpy distributions at the
E−TS (red) and the E−S states (blue). The arrows indicate the
inflection points at (μ + σ) and the difference defines ΔCP between
the two states according to the given formula (see eq 5). Reproduced
with permission from ref 427. Copyright 2018 Springer Nature.

from the enthalpy distribution obtained through MD
simulation (eq 6).426
CP =

H2
kBT 2

Review

(6)

Arcus et al. conducted kinetic experiments on the
homodimeric ketosteroid isomerase (KSI) as well as the
monomeric α-glucosidase, MalL. Their findings suggest that in
these distinctly different enzyme systems, heat capacity
reduction in transition states is primarily due to the negative
contribution to the heat capacity of the active site and regions
away from the center of the catalytic site (Figure 22).
Specifically, it was discovered that the noncatalytic monomer is
a significant contributor to the negative ΔCP⧧ in KSI. This
highlights the crucial role of dimerization during the catalytic
process.427 Similarly, this negative ΔCP⧧ contribution that
originates away from the catalytic site implies that MalL’s
evolution as a homodimer of (βα)4 units is feasible.428
Moreover, the reduction of heat capacity may be attributed to
the unique correlation network and reduced fluctuations within
the TS ensemble.429
Despite the limited experimental data, the heat capacity
reduction mechanism is a groundbreaking theoretical model
for homodimeric enzymes, illuminating an innovative relationship between heat capacity and catalytic efficiency. Homodi-

Figure 22. Partial heat capacity differences between reactant state and transition-state analogue complexes. Top: calculated partial ΔCP⧧ values for
protein regions. values including contribution from the ligand are indicated (*). Bottom: illustration of KSI (left) and MalL (right) colored based
on partial ΔCP⧧ regions from the top pane. Transition-state analogues are shown with space-filling spheres. Reproduced with permission from ref
427. Copyright 2018 Springer Nature.
9958

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.3c00042
Chem. Rev. 2023, 123, 9940−9981

Chemical Reviews

pubs.acs.org/CR

Review

they all catalyze ATP synthesis and/or hydrolysis.441 The F1
part catalyzes the conversion of ADP and Pi to ATP, while the
F0 subunit is responsible for connecting the proton translocation to the movement of the rotor.
ATPase enzymes exhibit positive cooperativity driven by the
proton pump. The 1993 proposal by Paul Boyer establishes the
F-ATPase as a rotational catalysis engine.442 The three
catalytic sites always maintain different conformations in
catalysis, and each 120° rotation represents a conformational
transition between the subunits leading to the release of an
ATP. The driving force of rotation (Δp) comes from the
osmotic pressure of protons in the inner and outer membranes,
which drives the rotation of ATPase when the protons pass
through the membrane (Figure 24). Although the energy Δp
required by this ATP synthase to make ATP has no general
value, there is consensus on the coupling between F0 and the
F1 catalytic site, which is believed to be crucial for ATP
synthesis or hydrolysis.443 Moreover, in the study of the
ATPases (hexamers) of the 26S proteasome (26S ATPases), it
was found that ATP binding and hydrolysis would induce the
substrate to enter the core 20S of the proteasome and be
catalyzed, where cooperative conformational changes between
subunits also exists in 26S ATPases.444 Rotational mechanisms
also exist in flagellar motors to transmit torsional force to
enable bacterial motility.445 Recently, Baker et al. took a step
forward in designing such shaft-rotor nanomachines by
mimicking the rotational mechanism in ATPase, that is,
coupling the biochemical energy of a proton pump to the
rotation of the rotor.446

Figure 23. Substrate binding and product release are coupled through
antisymmetric motion between subunits. Binding of a substrate to one
subunit can cause the adjacent subunit to release the product, or
conversely, the release of the product from one subunit can trigger the
binding and catalysis of the adjacent subunit’s substrate. Such
occurrences are commonly attributed to the asymmetric motion
between the subunits.

the product Pi of the adjacent subunit, located in the biotin
carboxylase domain, is released faster.439 The homotetrameric
enoyl-CoA carboxylase/reductase (ECR) from Kitasatospora
setae (K. setae ECR), one of the most efficient CO2-fixing
enzymes described to date, differentiates into a pair of dimers
with subunits in open and closed forms in the catalytically
active state, each with a torsional motion that may be
advantageous for substrate binding and product release.436 Wei
et al. discovered that the viral SET protein functions as a
dimer, performing H3K27 methylation at only one active site
in each turnover. After the product is released, the adjacent
subunit can perform the catalytic function.434 They proposed a
“walking” mechanism by which viral SET proteins can “walk”
on chromatin and catalyze, similar to myosin.435 If the
substrate on one subunit cannot be catalyzed, even after the
product of the adjacent subunit is released, it could be because
the substrate is bound too strongly to the subunit or because
the binding occurs in the allosteric pocket, an area in the
enzyme distinct from the active site.370
5.3.3.3. Special Cooperativity in ATPases. ATP synthase or
ATPase, composed of F0 and F1 subunits, is one of the most
commonly found and widespread proteins globally, catalyzing
the reversible reaction of ATP to ADP and Pi. It is one of the
most conserved proteins in bacteria, plants, and mammals, with
over 60% of the catalytic β-subunit amino acid residues staying
resistant to evolution.440 The enzyme is classified into various
types, including F (phosphorylation factor), V (vacuolar), A
(archaeal), P (proton), or E (extracellular) ATPases, although

6. FACTORS THAT AFFECT CATALYTIC
EFFICIENCY/COOPERATIVITY BETWEEN SUBUNITS
Several factors can result in changes in the cooperativity or
catalytic efficiency of dimeric enzymes. These factors include
ligand/cofactor or pH-induced changes in the conformation of
dimeric enzymes or oligomeric forms, environmental changes
resulting from mutations, as well as variations in cooperativity
between homologous enzymes.
6.1. Cofactor/Ligand or pH-induced Changes in
Conformation or Oligomeric Form

Cofactors can cause changes in dimer conformation or even
oligomer equilibrium, thereby altering their catalytic activity.
Human serine racemase (hSR) is a PLP-dependent dimeric
enzyme that catalyzes the reversible racemization of L-serine
and D -serine and their dehydration to pyruvate and
ammonia.447 ATP binding resulted in a change in the relative
orientation of the subunits,448 and the catalytic efficiency of L-

Figure 24. The rotational catalytic mechanism of F-ATPase. For clarity, only three β subunits are shown and the mechanism is seen from the top of
the F1 complex. There are three catalytic sites in three different conformations: loose, open and tight. The substrate (ADP + Pi) initially binds to
the open site and is converted to ATP at the tight site. In step 1, the rotation of the γ subunit induces a conformational change between subunits.
As a result, ATP is released from the enzyme. In step 2, the substrate binds again to the open site and another ATP is synthesized at the tight site.
9959

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.3c00042
Chem. Rev. 2023, 123, 9940−9981

Chemical Reviews

pubs.acs.org/CR

serine dehydration increased 31-fold (kcat/Km was 8.1 ± 1.1
and 253.0 ± 15.0 s−1 M−1 in the absence and presence of ATP,
respectively).449 Pyruvate carboxylase catalyzes the carboxylation of pyruvate to produce oxaloacetate,450 Acetyl-CoA
stabilizes the biotin carboxylase domain of pyruvate carboxylase in a catalytic conformation.451 Similarly, 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase (6PGDH; EC 1.1.1.44) catalyzes the
oxidative decarboxylation of 6-phosphogluconate (6PG) to
ribulose 5-phosphate (Ru5P) with NADPH in the oxidative
pathway of the pentose phosphate pathway (PPP).93 In
Trypanosoma brucei, 6PGDH has a dimer−tetramer equilibrium with a tetramer’s specific activity more than three times
higher than that of the dimer. Tetramerization is promoted by
NADPH, while 6PG is able to antagonize the NADPH
effect.452 Another example involves serine hydroxymethyltransferase 2 (SHMT2), which uses PLP as a cofactor to
regulate one-carbon transfer reactions necessary for amino acid
and nucleotide metabolism.453 SHMT2 exists as an inactive
dimer of unknown function but upon binding with PLP,
transitions into an active tetramer promoted by significant rigid
motion of two cofactor binding domains.454 Moreover, enzyme
I is a phosphotransferase that converts phosphoenolpyruvate
(PEP) to pyruvate and has two domains, the EIN domain
(residues 1 to 249) and the EIC domain (residues 261 to 575).
In physiological circumstances, the enzyme is in balance
between functional dimers and inactive monomers. However,
upon PEP binding to EIC, the conformational equilibrium tilts
toward a catalytically competent dimer/compact/closed state,
resulting in enzyme activation for catalysis.63
The pH can modulate the catalytic activity of oligomeric
enzymes. β-Ureidopropionidase (βUP) takes charge of the
third reaction in the reductive pyrimidine catabolic pathway,
degrading uracil, thymine, and pyrimidine-derived antimetabolites such as 5-fluorouracil. The human βUP (HsβUP) is
inactive as a homodimer at pH 9. Nonetheless, it can selfassemble into more active oligomers when the pH decreases to
physiological levels.455 Additionally, the predominant oligomeric state of pyruvate decarboxylase (PDC) is a tetramer
composed of four identical subunits, whose oligomer
dissociation depends on the subunit concentration, as well as
the pH and the concentration of the cofactor ThDP.456
Aqueous solutions of PDC from Saccharomyces cerevisiae
(ScPDC), PDC from Kluyveromyces lactis (KlPDC), and
PDC from pea seeds (Pisum sativum; PsPDC) undergo
extensive small-angle X-ray scattering analysis, indicating that
substantial tetramer dissociation occurs at a pH above 7.5.
Dimers, rather than tetramers, prevail when the pH is above 8,
whereas pH levels above 9 showcase significant amounts of
monomers.457−459

Review

alter the monomer−dimer balance and thus the catalytic
efficiency.462−464
Interfacial water molecules between subunits seem to be
very important for regulating enzyme cooperativity, and
interfacial water molecules that obviously change periodically
along the reaction coordinates have been observed in FAcD.344
The homodimeric hemoglobin protein from the invertebrate
Scapharca inaequivalvis (HbI) contains 11 and 17 interfacial
water molecules in oxygenated and deoxygenated HbI,
respectively.465 Yang et al. conducted additional studies
demonstrating that interfacial water molecules play an essential
role in regulating the mobility of Hb protein and escape of
ligands.466
6.3. Differences between Homologous Enzymes

Homologous enzymes may differ in their cooperativity in
substrate binding. For instance, D-lactate dehydrogenase (dLDH) from Fusobacterium nucleatum (FnLDH) and E. coli
(EcLDH) exhibit positive cooperativity in substrate binding,
whereas the Pseudomonas aeruginosa LDH (PaLDH) displays
negative cooperativity.467 Furthermore, soluble and membrane
classes of diiron desaturases demonstrate a fundamental
difference in their mechanisms, where only a single functional
monomer is needed for full activity of soluble acyl-ACP
desaturase dimers, while two active subunits are essential for
membrane desaturase activity.468 These experimental results
reflect the species-specific nature of the enzymes and their high
dependence on the catalytic environment.
The primary issue is whether subunit cooperativity is an
inherent property or a ligand-induced effect. Kinetics or
mutational experiments can aid in determining whether the
subunits in oligomeric enzymes function cooperatively or
independently.469
6.4. How to Distinguish Cooperativity from
Conformational Analysis

Conformational changes are a common feature in the catalytic
cycles of enzymes, and they occur between subunits, in
addition to electron and proton transfer, that can regulate
substrate entry, catalysis, and product release.2,470−472 These
conformational changes in catalytic pockets or substrate
channels can be challenging to attribute to simple open and
closed states and can assume a range of states that may impact
catalytic ability.473,474 For instance, the substrate binding and
product release of pyruvate carboxylase often involves
translocation between BCCP domain molecules.475,476 Also
as found in the homodimeric Aspergillus niger monoamine
oxidase (MAO-N), the β-hairpin conformation in one
monomer affects efficient substrate binding at the active site
of the other subunit.472 Cooperative conformational transitions
between subunits are common in the functional regulatory
proteins and ATPases.477 Furthermore, such conformational
differences can be detected by the methods described in
section 3, and some allosteric amino acids can also be deduced.
Cooperative conformational changes between subunits are
vital to enhance the efficiency of inhibitors and activators. With
conformational cooperativity between monomers, the binding
of one allosteric factor to the subunit will cause the
conformation and activity of itself and the other monomer to
change, achieving a dual effect. For example, the Enterobacter
mRNA interferase MazF, a homodimer, which has been shown
to have sequence-specific endoribonuclease activity, preferentially cleave single-stranded RNAs containing ACA sequences.478 When the labile antitoxin MazE binds to one site, the

6.2. Environmental Changes due to Mutations or Amino
Acid Modifications

Subunit cooperativity can be altered by mutations at key sites.
The 5′-methylthioadenosine/S-adenosyl-L-homocysteine nuclease from Vibrio cholerae (VcMTAN) stimulates the
breakdown of 5′-methylthioadenosine (MTA) into adenine
and 5-methylthiosugar (MTR).460 Transition-state analogues
inhibit VcMTAN by occupying both active sites of the
homodimer. When Schramm et al. mutated the single catalytic
amino acid Val153, the enzymatic activity was substantially
hindered by the binding of transition-state analogues only in
one site.461 And C-terminal Arg298 plays a critical role in
sustaining dimerization, and any changes in that region will
9960

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.3c00042
Chem. Rev. 2023, 123, 9940−9981

Chemical Reviews

pubs.acs.org/CR

conformation of the other monomer also changes, which
inhibits both MazF active sites.479 Similarly, tRNA-guanine
transglycosylases (TGTs) may exhibit ligand-induced conformational rearrangement, rendering it catalytically inactive.480

Review

region and a decrease in the stability of the catalytic
intermediate.485
7.2. Mediating Site-to-Site Communication

Extensive mutational experiments have demonstrated clear
communication between subunits, whereby small changes in
the amino acid environment on the enzyme’s communication
pathway can lead to changes in overall catalytic activity. These
communication amino acids may be located around the
catalytic pocket, at the interface, or even at distal domains.
SARS 3CLpro, also known as Mpro, is an essential protease
involved in the replication of the novel coronavirus, SARSCoV-2. Its enzymatic activity is highly dependent on the
cysteine−histidine catalytic duplex. An active dimer is created
through self-cleavage, which is necessary for its catalytic
activity.486 The importance of this enzyme to the virus
replication process is highlighted by its cleavage of the
coronavirus polyprotein at 11 conserved sites to form a variety
of functional proteins.486,487 A study by Freire et al. identified
three conserved serine residues (Ser139, Ser144, and Ser147)
away from the dimerization interface but around the catalytic
site. Mutations of these residues resulted in a significant
decrease in both catalytic activity and protein stability, as
evidenced by larger interface distances.488 Furthermore, the
structure of 3CLpro from various coronaviruses indicates that
residue interactions at the dimer interface are crucial for
catalytic activity.489,490
Mutations at the interface frequently cause cooperativity
changes.491−494 Lee et al. used NMR and MD simulations to
demonstrate that thymidylate synthase communicates between
sites through β sheets at the interface.483 Induced mutagenesis
replacing glycine 418 with a bulky tryptophan residue disrupts
atomic packing at the interface, resulting in enhanced
cooperativity.492 Disruption of the dimerization interface of
the response regulator PhoB results in significantly slower and
uncooperative autophosphorylation kinetics.493 In some
instances, communication between subunits can involve only
a few critical amino acids at the interface or even one amino
acid alone.495 For instance, endocannabinoid hydrolysis
FAAH’s subunit communication is triggered by a single
amino acid (W445) at the site of interface.171

7. THE IMPORTANT ROLE OF THE
SUBUNIT−SUBUNIT INTERFACE
Substantial research has indicated that mutation of key amino
acids at the subunit−subunit interface severely reduces
catalytic activity. This finding highlights the importance of
the subunit−subunit interface. Recent investigations have
shown that the interface acts as an antenna that senses various
allosteric signals,279 ensuring catalysis through long-range
interactions between the interface and the catalytic pocket,481,482 mediating site-to-site communication,483 and even
facilitating enzyme evolution484 (Figure 25).

Figure 25. Schematic diagram of the essential functions of the
interface. The subunit interface provides stability to the catalytic
pocket, facilitates site-to-site communication, and can also couple
intersubunit motions to generate more conformations that aid enzyme
evolution. Any change in this network hinders its cooperativity.

7.3. Facilitating Enzyme Evolution

Enzyme dynamics have also been proposed to contribute to
evolution,496,497 as the conformational energy landscape of
enzymes requires extensive remodeling as new functions
emerge.498 However, the underlying mechanisms of how
enzyme dynamics affects the emergence of new activity and the
decline of original activity have not been elucidated.302 It is
striking that the enzyme interface has contributed to the
change in relative conformation between subunits, which may
facilitate the generation of new functions. As in the conversion
of phosphotriesterase (PTE) to arylesterase (AE), 6 out of the
26 mutations were located around the dimer interface, the
dynamics of three PTE loops change substantially: L4
(residues 171−175), L5 (residues 202−207), and L7 (residues
258−274). L7 fluctuations gradually freeze to optimize the
new function, while L4 and L5 loops increase in mobility
during the evolution. Changing dynamics to shape the
landscape of pre-existing catalytic states is proposed.499 Coevolutionary analysis of the coupling between loops and
interfacial residues was performed using the GREMLIN500 by
Ambrus et al. It was found that residues of the L7 loop and
residues at the dimer interface exhibit significant coevolu-

7.1. Long-Range Interactions between the Interface and
the Catalytic Pocket

Long-range interactions between the interface and the pocket
stabilize the catalytic pocket, ensuring that the pocket is
preorganized and can efficiently perform its catalytic function.
Hong et al. identified key interface residues that interact with
the catalytic pocket in the peptidyl arginine deiminase 4
(PAD4) that, when mutated, severely reduce the catalytic
activity.481 Similarly, Phillips et al. demonstrated that longrange interactions between interface residues and the active
site are essential to ensure the catalytic function in the
homodimeric ornithine decarboxylase (ODC).482 Additionally,
Xu et al. explored the relationship between the dimerization
interface of 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase and the
fluctuation of the distal catalytic region, revealing that
mutation leads to an increase in the fluctuation of the catalytic
9961

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.3c00042
Chem. Rev. 2023, 123, 9940−9981

Chemical Reviews

pubs.acs.org/CR

Review

Figure 26. Structures and reaction pathways of some dimeric organic catalysts. (a) In Sharpless oxidation, the dimeric Ti(IV) catalyst is the real
catalytic species, with one Ti center acting as catalytic center and the other providing product selectivity through its special steric hindrance. (b) In
ring-opening of epoxides, the dimeric (salen)Cr(III) catalyst is a true catalyst, where one of the catalyst serves as a Lewis acid and the second
catalyst works as the nucleophile. (c) In enantioselective N−H insertion, novel structures of binuclear chiral spiro Cu(I) catalysts exhibit unique
reactivity and enantioselectivity in N−H insertion reactions. Reproduced from ref 511. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (d) In H2
photogeneration, the isolated dimer 2 shows a real catalytic role in photocatalysis.

but are also implicated in Carney complex disease.502 In
addition, inhibitors of binding at the interface can be designed
to exert a greater effect.503

tionary features. In addition, cooperative evolution was
observed between the L4 and L5 loops and between the Nterminal and C-terminal of the dimer interface.484 These
results suggest that the dynamic coupling between loops
residues driving loops rearrangement and the dimer interface is
evolutionarily conserved. Although the conversion of PTE to
AE is not synchronized in the two subunits of the enzyme
dimer, where the B subunit is converted earlier than the A
subunit.484 This is similar to gene duplication: one copy may
undergo significant sequence changes, while the other is more
restricted to the original function.501
It can be seen that the interface between the subunits acts as
an antenna for sensing conformational changes, and mutations
at any site on the allosteric pathway can cause the
conformational fluctuations to fail to transmit to the other
side, resulting in loss of cooperativity and even physiological
problems. Like the regulatory subunit Rlα, the cAMP receptor
for protein kinase A, mutations in residues at the Rlα dimer
interface not only lead to structural and biochemical changes

8. DIMERIC ORGANIC CATALYSTS AND BINUCLEAR
CATALYSTS
As established in earlier sections, the cooperative effect
between subunits can impact substrate binding, catalysis, and
product release through conformational changes, changes in
electrostatic environment, proton/electron transfer, or heat
capacity reduction. Dimeric organic catalysts and binuclear
catalysts similarly exhibit synergy, but the underlying
mechanism differs from that of the cooperativity in dimeric
enzymes. It is important to note that the following discussion
does not encompass bimetallic synergistic catalytic systems
where the two metals are not covalently linked and operate
independently of each other.504
9962

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.3c00042
Chem. Rev. 2023, 123, 9940−9981

Chemical Reviews

pubs.acs.org/CR

Review

Figure 27. Structures and reaction pathways of some binuclear catalysts. (a) In the Pauson−Khand reaction, the dinickel catalyst [NDI]Ni2 has
higher conversion and selectivity than mononickel catalyst. (b) Binuclear Co(II)Pc is formed through electronic contacts between two Co(II)
centers in the complex, and it exhibits a previously unknown extremely high catalytic activity for the oxidation of thiols to the corresponding
disulfides.

8.1. The Synergy in Dimeric Organic Catalysts

EPR, NMR, X-ray absorption spectroscopy, and DFT
calculations, confirmed dimer 2 as the real catalytic species,
while catalyst 1 acts as a precatalyst that produces H2 only
after being reduced to 2.512
Dimeric Pd catalysts have been widely used as transformation catalysts. The more stable dimeric Pd(I) catalysts,
with bench stability and robustness to nucleophiles as well as
recoverability in reactions, were explored and found to trigger
specific reactivities through dimerization.513 Yu et al. provide a
general experimental protocol for probing catalyst morphology
under active reaction conditions by combining kinetic
experiments with chiral and achiral ligand systems.514

While most catalysts in organic chemistry function as
monomers, there are exceptions in the form of dimeric or
oligomeric catalysts. The Sharpless epoxidation reaction
represents a landmark in asymmetric catalysis.505 As shown
in Figure 26a, the Ti(IV) catalyst exists in a dimeric form, as
confirmed by the X-ray crystal structure.506 Wu and Lai
developed a dimeric transition state with one Ti center as the
catalytic center and the other as a standby.507 Notably, the
standby monomer plays a crucial role in achieving high
enantioselectivity of the reaction. A bulky E is necessary
because it restricts the orientation of the peroxide R′, which
also needs to by bulky (t-Bu or C(Ph)3). This situation is
similar to the cooperative effect in dimeric enzymes.
A second example is the enantioselective ring opening of
epoxides catalyzed by (salen) Cr(III) complexes discovered by
Jacobsen’s group.508 In this case, one of the catalyst serves as a
Lewis acid while the other catalyst functions as the nucleophile
in this reaction. The two catalyst molecules work cooperatively, and form an asymmetric environment that causes high
enantioselectivity (Figure 26b).509
In asymmetric catalysis, dimeric catalysts are often used to
achieve high enantioselectivity through a nonlinear effect.
Various examples can be found in a review by Kagan and
colleagues.510 A recent example is reported by Zhu and Zhou,
in which each of the two Cu(I) atoms is trans-coordinated by
two nitrogen atoms from two spirobisoxazoline ligands.
Dimerization leads to special steric hindrance of the copper
center, allowing electron-deficient copper carbene to be
attacked by aniline from the less-hindered Re face, thereby
providing an insertion product with R configuration (Figure
26c).511
Inspired by the natural [NiFe]-H2 enzyme, Wu et al.
designed a novel catalyst 1, (dppe)Ni(μ-pdt)(μ-Cl)Ru(CO)2Cl to realize effective H2 photogeneration (Figure
26d). Experimental studies, including in situ IR spectroscopy,

8.2. The Synergy in Binuclear Catalysts

Since 2012, PubMed has included approximately 200 articles
on binuclear catalysts. Binuclear metal catalysts synergize with
the substrate, leading to higher catalytic efficiency than their
mononuclear counterparts, such as binuclear Ni(I) catalysts,515
binuclear Co(II) catalysts,516 and binuclear Fe(III) catalysts.517 This superiority over mononuclear catalysts stems
from the direct metal-to-metal covalent bonding, which creates
fresh electronic configurations, significantly affecting substrate
binding and reactivity.515 The nickel catalyst with naphthyridine−diimine (NDI) as a ligand catalyzes the Pauson−Khand
reaction,518 wherein the Ni−Ni bond creates a unique
electronic environment for the alkene−alkyne coupling
reaction to facilitate metallacycle formation through a
stabilizing secondary Ni−π interaction. This interaction is
absent in the mononickel pathway, which exhibits a slow rate
of reaction and low yield (98% yield for binuclear and <1% for
mononuclear, respectively) (Figure 27a).519 Furthermore, in
Hillhouse et al.’s study, it was revealed that the dinickel
complex effectively catalyzes the dimerization of aryl azides by
avoiding the inhibition of azoarene products.520
According to Wö h rle et al., a binuclear Co(II)Pc
demonstrates an unprecedented catalytic activity in the
oxidation of thiols to their corresponding disulfides.516 The
9963

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.3c00042
Chem. Rev. 2023, 123, 9940−9981

Chemical Reviews

pubs.acs.org/CR

extended π-electron system between two Co centers allows for
the transfer of electrons from thiolate to oxygen (as shown in
Figure 27b). The degree of nucleation (mono- and dinuclear)
and the compatibility of the two metal sites significantly
influence their catalytic efficiency.521
Dimeric organic catalysts or dinuclear metallocatalysts
cannot acquire a cooperative mechanism similar to that of
dimeric enzyems, at least not in terms of conformational
changes between subunits. This is primarily because these
metal catalysts mimic the catalytic center of binuclear
metalloenzymes, such as tyrosinase,522 methane monooxygenase (MMO),523 and hemocyanin,524 without fully considering
the unique backbone of dimeric enzymes. Therefore, it is
essential to investigate the characteristics of the molecular
backbone in dimeric enzymes and its relationship with catalytic
cooperativity. This understanding can then be transferred to
biomimetic binuclear catalysts, allowing for an additional
positive cooperativity between catalytic sites while maintaining
a broad substrate spectrum, a significant advantage of small
molecule catalysts.

Review

proteins using a neural network model represented by AF2
complex.219 Although such predictions are helpful, they do not
account for the broad dynamic properties of the dimeric
enzyme. By incorporating more sophisticated machine learning
models, it is expected that more accurate conformation
ensemble predictions will be achieved. This improvement
will play a crucial role in deciphering the molecular mechanism
of dimeric enzymes.
Small perturbations caused by mutations or effector binding
at allosteric sites result in dynamic changes that affect enzyme
catalysis. For dimeric enzymes, the substrate catalysis on a
subunit is not only affected by its own pocket environment but
also perturbed by the allosteric or active sites of the adjacent
subunit. Therefore, obtaining the allosteric pathway of
enzymes is crucial in understanding such allosteric effects.
Before the emergence of computational biology, it relied on
experimental biologists’ understanding of protein structure.
However, with increasing integration of interdisciplinary fields,
graph theory is now utilized to extract dynamic information
from MD simulations and to decipher the allosteric
mechanism.526 Despite some progress in various methods of
allosteric prediction based on MD trajectories as explained in
section 3.2.4, some issues persist. First, allosteric transformations occur over μs−ms or even ms−s time scales,
which may be too short for sufficient signal-to-noise ratio for
matrix decomposition. Second, there may be a delay between
the allosteric site perturbation and its response at the active
site, and linear correlation may not adequately reflect it.
Therefore, to more sensitively capture allosteric effects from
MD trajectories, allosteric prediction methods based on deep
learning, such as NRI-MD, are more promising.270 While
equilibrium MD simulations cannot access the time scale of
allostery and determine relevant event sequences, D-NEMD
can test the statistical significance of an enzyme’s response to a
perturbation by running tens to hundreds of nonequilibrium
simulations. For instance, Oliveira et al. utilized D-NEMD to
pinpoint the communication network between subunits of the
Mpro dimer, which may be associated with the drug resistance
of nirmatrelvir.527
Enzyme engineering offers the prospect of developing
dimeric enzymes with superior performance, although this
remains extremely challenging from a protein design standpoint. Conventionally, after comprehending the catalytic
mechanism of enzymes, we can rationally design catalytic
pockets by incorporating features such as hydrogen bonding
and adjustment of electrostatic environment.528 However,
these techniques fail to account for favorable conformational
cooperativity between subunits, and less attention is given to
interface interaction. Poor design can cause loss of
cooperativity and might even convert the dimer into a
monomer. Sequence-based coevolution strategies, such as
direct coupling analysis (DCA), can be relied on to address
this issue by considering the nature of stable dimeric structures
during evolution.529−531 In addition, the ancestral sequence
reconstruction (ASR) technology, which is based on multiple
sequence alignment, can produce ancestral enzymes with
higher stability, activity, and substrate variety compared to
modern enzymes, and thus, rule out conversion from dimer to
monomer when designing the dimeric enzyme.532 The
incorporation of machine learning has led to rapid advances
in protein design. We can use Protein MPNN to redesign the
interesting conformation of dimeric enzymes to improve their
physiological functionality.533 Progen or progen2 based on

9. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
As more homodimeric enzymes and other oligomeric enzymes
were characterized, their peculiar catalytic mechanisms and
biophysical models have resulted in an unprecedented level of
understanding. Here, we present a comprehensive overview of
experimental and theoretical techniques that have been
developed to investigate the impact of cooperativity between
the two protomers of dimeric enzymes on catalytic efficiency.
Specifically, our focus is 2-fold. First, we discuss the role of
substrate affinity cooperativity between subunits, where the
binding of one substrate affects the affinity of the second
subunit. This type of allosteric regulation does not necessarily
require a conformational transition; rather, a combination of
conformational entropy and enthalpy modulates its binding
affinity.
Second, we highlight recent evidence from kinetic enzymatic
approaches, which suggests that there is cooperative activity
between subunits during catalysis. This type of cooperativity
can be differentiated by structural features or by structurally
insignificant features. For instance, structurally significant
cooperativity may stem from conformational differences
between subunits or the formation of substrate channels
between subunits. In comparison, structurally insignificant
cooperativity results from the formation of a favorable
electrostatic environment after dimerization, a favorable
hydrogen bond network, electron transfer between subunits,
or heat capacity reduction mechanisms, among others. Finally,
we demonstrate that dimeric organic catalysts and binuclear
metal catalysts also exhibit synergy, even in the absence of
conformational changes in the subunits. These observations
offer promising insights for the development of biomimetic
binuclear catalysts.
Upon retrospectively analyzing the molecular mechanism of
dimeric enzymes, it has become apparent that the majority of
the favorable catalytic factors are due to the conformational
cooperativity between subunits. However, to adequately
observe and characterize these conformations, it is essential
to sample individual states sufficiently. Several approaches have
successfully achieved this, such as room temperature X-ray
crystallography (RTX)147,148 and time-resolved crystallography.525 On the other hand, computational biologists have
already attempted to predict the most stable structure of
9964

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.3c00042
Chem. Rev. 2023, 123, 9940−9981

Chemical Reviews

pubs.acs.org/CR

large language models (LLMs) can utilize the public 280
million protein sequence data sets for training and design
artificial enzymes with even higher activity than natural
enzymes, despite a sequence similarity of only 31.4%.534,535
Recently, Zhao et al. developed a machine learning algorithm
called CLEAN (Contrastive Learning Enabled Enzyme
Annotation) that produces high accuracy, high reliability, and
high sensitivity predictions of enzyme function.536
Designing multinuclear catalysts with reference to the
cooperativity of dimeric enzymes poses a great challenge.
The cooperativity of dimeric enzymes has a great relationship
with the protein backbone, which implies that backbone design
is essential for multinuclear catalysts. To create binuclear
catalysts, it is necessary to integrate the dynamic properties of
dimeric enzymes through evolutionary information or other
methods. While machine learning models have been
emphasized throughout, their rational application requires a
substantial amount of experimental data. For instance, if some
models are employed to score the activity or stability of the
sequence directly, this necessitates a great deal of kinetic data,
such as kcat, kobs, and Tm, etc. Consequently, the development
of high-throughput techniques is essential. Therefore, we have
summarized several homodimeric enzyme models in this work,
envisioning their guiding value in facilitating enzyme catalysis.

Review

on investigating the mechanism of enzyme catalysis and protein
design, with particular attention to the modification and catalytic
mechanisms of dimeric enzymes.
Tian-Yu Sun received his B.Sc. in Applied Chemistry from Beihang
University in 2012, where he studied the experimental and theoretical
calculation of Raman spectroscopy of nanomaterials under the
guidance of Prof. Penggang Yin. In 2012, he went to Peking
University as an undergraduate student. In 2017, Tian-Yu earned his
Ph.D. in Chemical Genomics in Prof. Yun-Dong Wu’s research group
at Peking University. His research interest focuses on computational
chemistry. With more than 20 publications, his research achievement
has been recognized with the outstanding performance during the
academic years in PKU. In 2018−2020, Tian-Yu completed
postdoctoral work at Beihang University. Tian-Yu is now an assistant
research fellow at Shenzhen Bay Laboratory.
Yun-Dong Wu received his B.Sc. from Lanzhou University in 1981
and Ph.D. from University of Pittsburgh in 1986. He had a long
association with K. N. Houk, both as a graduate student and as a
research associate. In 1992, he joined the HKUST. Currently, he is
Chair Professor of Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School and
a Chief Scientist of Shenzhen Bay Laboratory. He has been a Board
member of Would Association of Theoretical and Computational
Chemists (WATOC) since 1999. He was a founding member of
Asian-Pacific Association of Theoretical and Computational Chemists
(APATCC) and has served as President since 2019. He has published
over 290 papers in prominent journals, including almost 90 papers in
prestigious publications (i.e., Science, Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences U. S. A., Accounts of Chemical Research, Journal of
the American Chemical Society, and Angew. Chem.). His research group
is interested in understanding the mechanisms of catalysis, molecular
designs with peptides, modeling of protein folding, and protein/
protein interactions.

AUTHOR INFORMATION
Corresponding Author

Yun-Dong Wu − Lab of Computional Chemistry and Drug
Design, State Key Laboratory of Chemical Oncogenomics,
Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, Shenzhen
518055, China; Shenzhen Bay Laboratory, Shenzhen
518132, China; orcid.org/0000-0003-4477-7332;
Email: wuyd@pkusz.edu.cn

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was financially supported by the Key-Area Research
and Development Program of Guangdong Province
(2020B0101350001). Shenzhen Fundamental Research Program (no. GXWD20201231165807007-20200812124825001).
This work was supported by Shenzhen Bay Laboratory
Supercomputing Center.

Authors

Ke-Wei Chen − Lab of Computional Chemistry and Drug
Design, State Key Laboratory of Chemical Oncogenomics,
Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, Shenzhen
518055, China
Tian-Yu Sun − Shenzhen Bay Laboratory, Shenzhen 518132,
China; orcid.org/0000-0002-7746-479X
Complete contact information is available at:
https://pubs.acs.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.3c00042

ABBREVIATIONS
6FP = 6-formylpterin
6PG = 6-phosphogluconate
6PGDH = 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenas
βUP = β-ureidopropionidase
A3A = a member of the human APOBEC3 family of
proteins
AAC(6’)-Ii = aminoglycoside N-(6′)-acetyltransferase Ii
AcCoA = acetyl coenzyme A
ADARs = adenosine deaminases acting on RNA
AE = arylesterase
AICAR = 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide ribonucleotide
ALK = anaplastic lymphoma kinase
ALLINIs = allosteric HIV-1 integrase inhibitors
ANM = anisotropic network model
AP = alkaline phosphatase
ASADH = Asp semialdehyde dehydrogenase
ASR = ancestral sequence reconstruction
BC = biotin carboxylase
bcHIBADH = 3-hydroxyisobutyrate dehydrogenase from
Bacillus cereus

Author Contributions

CRediT: Ke-Wei Chen conceptualization, formal analysis,
investigation, data curation, visualization, writing-original draft,
writing-review and editing; Tian-Yu Sun writing-review and
editing, supervision; Yun-Dong Wu funding acquisition,
editing, supervision. CRediT: Ke-Wei Chen conceptualization,
data curation, formal analysis, investigation, methodology,
validation, visualization, writing-original draft, writing-review &
editing; Tian-Yu Sun supervision, writing-review & editing;
Yun-Dong Wu funding acquisition, project administration,
supervision, writing-review & editing.
Notes

The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Biographies
Ke-Wei Chen obtained his B.E. from Jiangnan University in 2020.
Currently, he is pursuing his Ph.D. under the guidance of Prof. YunDong Wu at Peking University. His research interest primarily focuses
9965

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.3c00042
Chem. Rev. 2023, 123, 9940−9981

Chemical Reviews

pubs.acs.org/CR

BLI = biolayer interferometry
CAP = catabolite-activating protein
CD = circular dichroism
Cij = covariance between residues i and j
CNNs = convolutional neural networks
CPMG = Carr−Purcell−Meiboom−Gill
cryo-EM = cryo-electron microscopy
CT = carboxytransferase
Cu/Zn-SOD = copper/zinc-superoxide dismutase
CVs = collective variables
DAP = diaminopimelate or diaminopimelic acid
DapE = diaminopimelic acid desuccinylase
DCA = direct coupling analysis
DE = directed evolution
DHFR = dihydrofolate reductase
DHODA = dihydroorotate dehydrogenase A
DIRNs = dynamically important residue networks
D-NEMD = dynamic nonequilibrium molecular dynamic
dsRBDs = double-stranded RNA binding domains
E4P = aldose D-erythrose-4-phosphate
EGF = epidermal growth factor
EGFR = epidermal growth factor receptor
ENM = elastic network model
ES = substrate-bound states of enzymes
EtOH = ethanol
FAc = fluoroacetic acid
FAcD = fluoroacetic acid dehalogenase
F6P = ketose D-6-phosphate fructose
FEP = free energy perturbation
Fno = F420H2:NADP+ oxidoreductase
FRET = fluorescence resonance energy transfer
G3P = D-glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
GAP = glyceraldehyde 3-phosphoric acid
GB = generalized Born
GdnCl = guanidine hydrochloride
GmhA = bacterial heptose isomerase
Gln = glutamine
Glu = glutamate
GoA = glycolic acid
H3K9 = Lys-9 in histone H3
HbI = hemoglobin protein from the invertebrate Scapharca
inaequivalvis
HisFH = imidazole glycerol phosphate synthas
HLDA = harmonic linear discriminant analysis
HPC = high performance computing
hSR = human serine racemase
HT = Hilser−Thompson
IDM = information distilling of metastability
IGP = indole-3-glycerophosphate
ImGP = imidazole glycerol phosphate
IN = HIV-1 integrase
ITS = integrated tempering sampling
kcat = catalytic rate
kd = dissociation constant or binding affinity
Km = Michaelis−Menten constant
KNF = Koshland-Némethy-Filmer
K. setae ECR = enoyl-CoA carboxylase/reductase (ECR)
from Kitasatospora setae
KSI = ketosteroid isomerase
LBHBs = low-barrier hydrogen bonds
LDH = lactate dehydrogenase
LIE = linear interaction energy
LLMs = large language models

Review

MAO-N = monoamine oxidase from Aspergillus niger
MD = molecular dynamics
MetaD = metadynamics
MI = mutual information
micro-ED = microcrystal electron diffraction
MM = molecular mechanics
MMGBSA = molecular mechanics generalized Born surface
area
MMO = methane monooxygenase
MMPBSA = molecular mechanics Poisson−Boltzmann
surface area
MMRT = macromolecular rate theory
mPPase = membrane-bound inorganic pyrophosphatase
MS = mass spectrometry
MSA = multiple sequence alignment
MSMs = Markov state models
MST = microscale thermophoresis
MTA = 5′-methylthioadenosin
MTAN = 5′-methylthioadenosine/S-adenosylhomocysteine
nucleosidase
MTases = methyltransferases
MWC = Monod−Wyman−Changeux
NDI = naphthyridine-diimine
NMA = normal-mode analysis
NMR = nuclear magnetic resonance
NRI = neural relational inference
OA = orotic acid
ODC = ornithine decarboxylase
OMP = nucleotide orotidine 5′-phosphate
OMPDC = orotidine-5′-monophosphate decarboxylase
OMPLA = outer membrane phospholipase A
OPRTase = orotate phosphoribosyltransferase
PAD4 = peptidyl arginine deiminase 4
PAH = phenylalanine hydroxylase
PAH-RD = N-terminal regulatory domain of the phenylalanine hydroxylase
PB = Poisson−Boltzmann
PC = pyruvate carboxylase
PCET = proton-coupled electron transfer
PCNs = protein contact networks
PCS = pseudocontact shifts
PDC = pyruvate decarboxylase
PDH = pyruvate dehydrogenase
PEP = phosphoenolpyruvate
PfA = Pyrococcus f uriosus L-asparaginase
PFV = protein film voltammetry
PGPase = phosphatidyl glycerol phosphatase
Phe = phenylalanine
PKA-C = cAMP-dependent protein kinase A
PLP = pyridoxal 5′-phosphate
PMF = potential mean force
PMV = partial molar volume
PPi = diphosphate
PrFAR = N′-[(5′-phosphoribulosyl) formimino]-5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide ribonucleotide
PRPP = 5-α-D-phoshorylribose 1-diphosphate
PRS = perturbation response sweep
PSNs = protein structure networks
PPI = protein−protein interaction
PPP = pentose phosphate pathway
PTE = phosphotriesterase
QM = quantum mechanics
REMD = replica exchange molecular dynamics
9966

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.3c00042
Chem. Rev. 2023, 123, 9940−9981

Chemical Reviews

pubs.acs.org/CR

Review

G. J.; et al. The Structure of Serine Palmitoyltransferase; Gateway to
Sphingolipid Biosynthesis. J. Mol. Biol. 2007, 370, 870−886.
(12) Hattori, A.; Unno, H.; Goda, S.; Motoyama, K.; Yoshimura, T.;
Hemmi, H. In Vivo Formation of the Protein Disulfide Bond That
Enhances the Thermostability of Diphosphomevalonate Decarboxylase, an Intracellular Enzyme from the Hyperthermophilic Archaeon
Sulfolobus Solfataricus. J. Bacteriol. 2015, 197, 3463−3471.
(13) Bisht, S.; Rajaram, V.; Bharath, S. R.; Kalyani, J. N.; Khan, F.;
Rao, A. N.; Savithri, H. S.; Murthy, M. R. Crystal Structure of
Escherichia Coli Diaminopropionate Ammonia-Lyase Reveals Mechanism of Enzyme Activation and Catalysis. J. Biol. Chem. 2012, 287,
20369−20381.
(14) Kim, T. H.; Mehrabi, P.; Ren, Z.; Sljoka, A.; Ing, C.; Bezginov,
A.; Ye, L.; Pomes, R.; Prosser, R. S.; Pai, E. F. The Role of Dimer
Asymmetry and Protomer Dynamics in Enzyme Catalysis. Science
2017, 355, eaag2355.
(15) Wangpaiboon, K.; Laohawuttichai, P.; Kim, S.-Y.; Mori, T.;
Nakapong, S.; Pichyangkura, R.; Pongsawasdi, P.; Hakoshima, T.;
Krusong, K. A Gh13 Α-Glucosidase from Weissella Cibaria
Uncommonly Acts on Short-Chain Maltooligosaccharides. Acta
Crystallogr. D: Struct. Biol. 2021, 77, 1064−1076.
(16) Bagautdinov, B.; Kuroishi, C.; Sugahara, M.; Kunishima, N.
Crystal Structures of Biotin Protein Ligase from Pyrococcus
Horikoshii Ot3 and Its Complexes: Structural Basis of Biotin
Activation. J. Mol. Biol. 2005, 353, 322−333.
(17) Larson, E. T.; Kim, J. E.; Castaneda, L. J.; Napuli, A. J.; Zhang,
Z.; Fan, E.; Zucker, F. H.; Verlinde, C. L.; Buckner, F. S.; Van
Voorhis, W. C. The Double-Length Tyrosyl-Trna Synthetase from the
Eukaryote Leishmania Major Forms an Intrinsically Asymmetric
Pseudo-Dimer. J. Mol. Biol. 2011, 409, 159−176.
(18) Cao, H.; Hall, J.; Hille, R. Substrate Orientation and Specificity
in Xanthine Oxidase: Crystal Structures of the Enzyme in Complex
with Indole-3-Acetaldehyde and Guanine. Biochemistry 2014, 53,
533−541.
(19) Musayev, F. N.; Di Salvo, M. L.; Ko, T. P.; Schirch, V.; Safo, M.
K. Structure and Properties of Recombinant Human Pyridoxine 5′Phosphate Oxidase. Protein Sci. 2003, 12, 1455−1463.
(20) Dams, T.; Auerbach, G.; Bader, G.; Jacob, U.; Ploom, T.;
Huber, R.; Jaenicke, R. The Crystal Structure of Dihydrofolate
Reductase from Thermotoga Maritima: Molecular Features of
Thermostability. J. Mol. Biol. 2000, 297, 659−672.
(21) Kim, S.-K.; Reddy, S. K.; Nelson, B. C.; Vasquez, G. B.; Davis,
A.; Howard, A. J.; Patterson, S.; Gilliland, G. L.; Ladner, J. E.; Reddy,
P. T. Biochemical and Structural Characterization of the Secreted
Chorismate Mutase (Rv1885c) from Mycobacterium Tuberculosis
H37rv: An* Aroq Enzyme Not Regulated by the Aromatic Amino
Acids. J. Bacteriol. 2006, 188, 8638−8648.
(22) Hogancamp, T. N.; Cory, S. A.; Barondeau, D. P.; Raushel, F.
M. Structure and Chemical Reaction Mechanism of Ligu, an Enzyme
That Catalyzes an Allylic Isomerization in the Bacterial Degradation
of Lignin. Biochemistry 2019, 58, 3494−3503.
(23) Qin, X.; Deng, X.; Chen, L.; Xie, W. Crystal Structure of the
Wild-Type Human Glyrs Bound with Trnagly in a Productive
Conformation. J. Mol. Biol. 2016, 428, 3603−3614.
(24) Monod, J.; Changeux, J.-P.; Jacob, F. Allosteric Proteins and
Cellular Control Systems. J. Mol. Biol. 1963, 6, 306−329.
(25) Perutz, M. F. Stereochemistry of Cooperative Effects in
Haemoglobin: Haem−Haem Interaction and the Problem of
Allostery. Nature 1970, 228, 726−734.
(26) Schulz, C. E.; Castillo, R. G.; Pantazis, D. A.; DeBeer, S.; Neese,
F. Structure−Spectroscopy Correlations for Intermediate Q of
Soluble Methane Monooxygenase: Insights from Qm/Mm Calculations. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2021, 143, 6560−6577.
(27) Rumfeldt, J. A.; Galvagnion, C.; Vassall, K. A.; Meiering, E. M.
Conformational Stability and Folding Mechanisms of Dimeric
Proteins. Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 2008, 98, 61−84.
(28) Doyle, C. M.; Rumfeldt, J. A.; Broom, H. R.; Broom, A.;
Stathopulos, P. B.; Vassall, K. A.; Almey, J. J.; Meiering, E. M.

RID = reinforced dynamics
RPTPα = receptor protein-tyrosine phosphatase α
RTK = receptor tyrosine kinase
RTX = room temperature X-ray crystallography
Ru5P = ribulose 5-phosphate
S7P = D-sedoheptulose-7-phosphate
SAH = S-adenosylhomocysteine
Sfβgly = GH1 β-glucosidase from Spodoptera frugiperda
SFX = serial femtosecond crystallography
SHMT2 = serine hydroxymethyltransferase 2
SIS = sugar isomerase
smFRET = single-molecule FRET
soNrfA = cytochrome c nitrite reductase from Shewanella
oneidensis
spAAP = psychrophilic acyl aminoacyl peptidase from
Sporosarcina psychrophila
SPR = surface plasmon resonance
Tac TAL = transaldolase from T. acidophilum
ThDP = thiamine diphosphate
TGTs = tRNA-guanine transglycosylases
TI = thermodynamic integration
TICA = time-lagged independent component analysis
TIM = triosephosphate isomerase
TK = transketolase
TS = thymidylate synthase
TSE = transition state ensemble
UMP = uridine-5′-monophosphate
XO = xanthine oxidase

REFERENCES
(1) Mei, G.; Di Venere, A.; Rosato, N.; Finazzi-Agro, A. The
Importance of Being Dimeric. FEBS J. 2005, 272, 16−27.
(2) Wells, S. A.; van der Kamp, M. W.; McGeagh, J. D.; Mulholland,
A. J. Structure and Function in Homodimeric Enzymes: Simulations
of Cooperative and Independent Functional Motions. PLoS One
2015, 10, No. e0133372.
(3) Ribeiro, P. M.; Fernandes, H. S.; Maia, L. B.; Sousa, S. F.;
Moura, J. J.; Cerqueira, N. M. The Complete Catalytic Mechanism of
Xanthine Oxidase: A Computational Study. Inorg. Chem. Front. 2021,
8, 405−416.
(4) Cardinale, D.; Salo-Ahen, O.; Ferrari, S.; Ponterini, G.; Cruciani,
G.; Carosati, E.; Tochowicz, A.; Mangani, S.; Wade, R.; Costi, M. P.
Homodimeric Enzymes as Drug Targets. Curr. Med. Chem. 2010, 17,
826−846.
(5) Chang, A.; Jeske, L.; Ulbrich, S.; Hofmann, J.; Koblitz, J.;
Schomburg, I.; Neumann-Schaal, M.; Jahn, D.; Schomburg, D.
Brenda, the Elixir Core Data Resource in 2021: New Developments
and Updates. Nucleic Acids Res. 2021, 49, D498−D508.
(6) Matthews, J. M.; Sunde, M. Dimers, Oligomers, Everywhere.
Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 2012, 747, 1−18.
(7) UniProt Consortium UniProt: A Hub for Protein Information
Nucleic Acids Res. , 43, D204−D212.
(8) Oweis, W.; Padala, P.; Hassouna, F.; Cohen-Kfir, E.; Gibbs, D.
R.; Todd, E. A.; Berndsen, C. E.; Wiener, R. Trans-Binding
Mechanism of Ubiquitin-Like Protein Activation Revealed by a
Uba5-Ufm1 Complex. Cell Rep. 2016, 16, 3113−3120.
(9) Shen, Y.; Joachimiak, A.; Rosner, M. R.; Tang, W.-J. Structures of
Human Insulin-Degrading Enzyme Reveal a New Substrate
Recognition Mechanism. Nature 2006, 443, 870−874.
(10) Jakobi, S.; Nguyen, P. T. X.; Debaene, F.; Cianférani, S.;
Reuter, K.; Klebe, G. What Glues a Homodimer Together: Systematic
Analysis of the Stabilizing Effect of an Aromatic Hot Spot in the
Protein−Protein Interface of the Trna-Modifying Enzyme Tgt. ACS
Chem. Biol. 2015, 10, 1897−1907.
(11) Yard, B. A.; Carter, L. G.; Johnson, K. A.; Overton, I. M.;
Dorward, M.; Liu, H.; McMahon, S. A.; Oke, M.; Puech, D.; Barton,
9967

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.3c00042
Chem. Rev. 2023, 123, 9940−9981

Chemical Reviews

pubs.acs.org/CR

Energetics of Oligomeric Protein Folding and Association. Arch.
Biochem. Biophys. 2013, 531, 44−64.
(29) Wang, X.; Cao, W.; Cao, A.; Lai, L. Thermodynamic
Characterization of the Folding Coupled DNA Binding by the
Monomeric Transcription Activator Gcn4 Peptide. Biophys. J. 2003,
84, 1867−1875.
(30) Tse, C.; Wickstrom, L.; Kvaratskhelia, M.; Gallicchio, E.; Levy,
R.; Deng, N. Exploring the Free-Energy Landscape and Thermodynamics of Protein-Protein Association. Biophys. J. 2020, 119, 1226−
1238.
(31) Chong, S.-H.; Ham, S. Impact of Chemical Heterogeneity on
Protein Self-Assembly in Water. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2012,
109, 7636−7641.
(32) Yang, C.; Jang, S.; Pak, Y. Computational Probing of
Temperature-Dependent Unfolding of a Small Globular Protein:
From Cold to Heat Denaturation. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2021, 17,
515−524.
(33) Choudhury, N.; Pettitt, B. M. Enthalpy-Entropy Contributions
to the Potential of Mean Force of Nanoscopic Hydrophobic Solutes.
J. Phys. Chem. B 2006, 110, 8459−8463.
(34) Ivankov, D. N.; Garbuzynskiy, S. O.; Alm, E.; Plaxco, K. W.;
Baker, D.; Finkelstein, A. V. Contact Order Revisited: Influence of
Protein Size on the Folding Rate. Protein Sci. 2003, 12, 2057−2062.
(35) Yuan, X.; Johnson, M. D.; Zhang, J.; Lo, A. W.; Schembri, M.
A.; Wijeyewickrema, L. C.; Pike, R. N.; Huysmans, G. H. M.;
Henderson, I. R.; Leyton, D. L. Molecular Basis for the Folding of ΒHelical Autotransporter Passenger Domains. Nat. Commun. 2018, 9,
1395−1406.
(36) Garg, D. K.; Kundu, B. Hyperthermophilic L-Asparaginase
Bypasses Monomeric Intermediates During Folding to Retain
Cooperativity and Avoid Amyloid Assembly. Arch. Biochem. Biophys.
2017, 622, 36−46.
(37) Garg, D. K.; Tomar, R.; Dhoke, R. R.; Srivastava, A.; Kundu, B.
Domains of Pyrococcus Furiosus L-Asparaginase Fold Sequentially
and Assemble through Strong Intersubunit Associative Forces.
Extremophiles 2015, 19, 681−691.
(38) Luke, K. A.; Higgins, C. L.; Wittung-Stafshede, P.
Thermodynamic Stability and Folding of Proteins from Hyperthermophilic Organisms. FEBS J. 2007, 274, 4023−4033.
(39) Balchin, D.; Hayer-Hartl, M.; Hartl, F. U. In Vivo Aspects of
Protein Folding and Quality Control. Science 2016, 353, aac4354.
(40) Best, R. B. Analysis of Molecular Dynamics Simulations of
Protein Folding. Methods Mol. Biol. 2022, 2376, 317−329.
(41) Velasco-Bolom, J. L.; Domínguez, L. Exploring the Folding
Process of Human Βb2-Crystallin Using Multiscale Molecular
Dynamics and the Markov State Model. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys.
2020, 22, 26753−26763.
(42) Plattner, N.; Doerr, S.; De Fabritiis, G.; Noé, F. Complete
Protein-Protein Association Kinetics in Atomic Detail Revealed by
Molecular Dynamics Simulations and Markov Modelling. Nat. Chem.
2017, 9, 1005−1011.
(43) Zhuravleva, A.; Korzhnev, D. M. Protein Folding by Nmr. Prog.
Nucl. Magn. Reson. Spectrosc. 2017, 100, 52−77.
(44) Chung, H. S.; Eaton, W. A. Protein Folding Transition Path
Times from Single Molecule Fret. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 2018, 48,
30−39.
(45) Sahu, D.; Bastidas, M.; Lawrence, C. W.; Noid, W. G.;
Showalter, S. A. Assessing Coupled Protein Folding and Binding
through Temperature-Dependent Isothermal Titration Calorimetry.
Methods Enzymol. 2016, 567, 23−45.
(46) Siligardi, G.; Hussain, R. Cd Spectroscopy: An Essential Tool
for Quality Control of Protein Folding. Methods Mol. Biol. 2015, 1261,
255−276.
(47) Doyle, M. T.; Jimah, J. R.; Dowdy, T.; Ohlemacher, S. I.;
Larion, M.; Hinshaw, J. E.; Bernstein, H. D. Cryo-Em Structures
Reveal Multiple Stages of Bacterial Outer Membrane Protein Folding.
Cell 2022, 185, 1143−1156.
(48) Hu, W.; Walters, B. T.; Kan, Z. Y.; Mayne, L.; Rosen, L. E.;
Marqusee, S.; Englander, S. W. Stepwise Protein Folding at near

Review

Amino Acid Resolution by Hydrogen Exchange and Mass
Spectrometry. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2013, 110, 7684−7689.
(49) Roche, J.; Royer, C. A.; Roumestand, C. Exploring Protein
Conformational Landscapes Using High-Pressure Nmr. Methods
Enzymol. 2019, 614, 293−320.
(50) Schwab, T.; Skegro, D.; Mayans, O.; Sterner, R. A Rationally
Designed Monomeric Variant of Anthranilate Phosphoribosyltransferase from Sulfolobus Solfataricus Is as Active as the Dimeric WildType Enzyme but Less Thermostable. J. Mol. Biol. 2008, 376, 506−
516.
(51) Boulanger, R. R.; Kantrowitz, E. R. Characterization of a
Monomeric Escherichia Coli Alkaline Phosphatase Formed Upon a
Single Amino Acid Substitution. J. Biol. Chem. 2003, 278, 23497−
23501.
(52) Mateu, M. G. Conformational Stability of Dimeric and
Monomeric Forms of the C-Terminal Domain of Human
Immunodeficiency Virus-1 Capsid Protein. J. Mol. Biol. 2002, 318,
519−531.
(53) Awasthi, M.; Batra, J.; Kateriya, S. Disulphide Bridges of
Phospholipase C of Chlamydomonas Reinhardtii Modulates Lipid
Interaction and Dimer Stability. PLoS One 2012, 7, e39258.
(54) Butturini, E.; Gotte, G.; Dell’Orco, D.; Chiavegato, G.; Marino,
V.; Canetti, D.; Cozzolino, F.; Monti, M.; Pucci, P.; Mariotto, S.
Intermolecular Disulfide Bond Influences Unphosphorylated Stat3
Dimerization and Function. Biochem. J. 2016, 473, 3205−3219.
(55) Dinda, A. K.; Tripathy, D. R.; Das, A.; Dasgupta, S.
Comparison of the Ribonucleolytic Activity of the Dityrosine CrossLinked Ribonuclease a Dimer with Its Monomer in the Presence of
Inhibitors. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 2014, 63, 107−113.
(56) Vázquez, G.; Caballero, A. B.; Kokinda, J.; Hijano, A.; Sabaté,
R.; Gamez, P. Copper, Dityrosine Cross-Links and Amyloid-Β
Aggregation. J. Biol. Inorg. Chem. 2019, 24, 1217−1229.
(57) Srivastava, R.; Chattopadhyaya, M.; Bandyopadhyay, P.
Calculation of Salt-Dependent Free Energy of Binding of ΒLactoglobulin Homodimer Formation and Mechanism of Dimer
Formation Using Molecular Dynamics Simulation and ThreeDimensional Reference Interaction Site Model (3d-Rism): Diffuse
Salt Ions and Non-Polar Interactions between the Monomers Favor
the Dimer Formation. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2020, 22, 2142−2156.
(58) Matyushenko, A. M.; Kleymenov, S. Y.; Susorov, D. S.;
Levitsky, D. I. Thermal Unfolding of Homodimers and Heterodimers
of Different Skeletal-Muscle Isoforms of Tropomyosin. Biophys. Chem.
2018, 243, 1−7.
(59) Aguirre, C.; Goto, Y.; Costas, M. Thermal and Chemical
Unfolding Pathways of Pasdsa1 Sulfatase, a Homo-Dimer with
Topologically Interlinked Chains. FEBS Lett. 2016, 590, 202−214.
(60) Biswas, H.; Chattopadhyaya, R. Thermal, Chemical and Ph
Induced Unfolding of Turmeric Root Lectin: Modes of Denaturation.
PLoS One 2014, 9, e103579.
(61) Di Venere, A.; Nicolai, E.; Rosato, N.; Rossi, A.; Finazzi Agrò,
A.; Mei, G. Characterization of Monomeric Substates of Ascorbate
Oxidase. FEBS J. 2011, 278, 1585−1593.
(62) Pacheco, S.; Widjaja, M. A.; Gomez, J. S.; Crowhurst, K. A.;
Abrol, R. The Complex Role of the N-Terminus and Acidic Residues
of Hdea as Ph-Dependent Switches in Its Chaperone Function.
Biophys. Chem. 2020, 264, 106406.
(63) Nguyen, T. T.; Ghirlando, R.; Roche, J.; Venditti, V. Structure
Elucidation of the Elusive Enzyme I Monomer Reveals the Molecular
Mechanisms Linking Oligomerization and Enzymatic Activity. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2021, 118, e2100298118.
(64) Bhunia, A.; Ilyas, H.; Bhattacharjya, S. Salt Dependence
Conformational Stability of the Dimeric Sam Domain of Mapkkk
Ste11 from Budding Yeast: A Native-State H/D Exchange Nmr Study.
Biochemistry 2020, 59, 2849−2858.
(65) Hjörleifsson, J. G.; Á sgeirsson, B. Chloride Promotes Refolding
of Active Vibrio Alkaline Phosphatase through an Inactive Dimeric
Intermediate with an Altered Interface. FEBS Open Bio 2019, 9, 169−
184.
9968

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.3c00042
Chem. Rev. 2023, 123, 9940−9981

Chemical Reviews

pubs.acs.org/CR

(66) Powers, S. L.; Robinson, C. R.; Robinson, A. S. Denaturation of
an Extremely Stable Hyperthermophilic Protein Occurs Via a Dimeric
Intermediate. Extremophiles 2007, 11, 179−189.
(67) Kalita, J.; Shukla, R.; Shukla, H.; Gadhave, K.; Giri, R.; Tripathi,
T. Comprehensive Analysis of the Catalytic and Structural Properties
of a Mu-Class Glutathione S-Transferase from Fasciola Gigantica. Sci.
Rep. 2017, 7, 17547.
(68) Biswas, P.; Sahu, D. K.; Sahu, K.; Banerjee, R. Spectroscopic
Studies of Asparaginyl-Trna Synthetase from Entamoeba Histolytica.
Protein Pept. Lett. 2019, 26, 435−448.
(69) Banerjee, P.; Mondal, S.; Bagchi, B. Effect of Ethanol on Insulin
Dimer Dissociation. J. Chem. Phys. 2019, 150, No. 084902.
(70) Si Chaib, Z.; Marchetto, A.; Dishnica, K.; Carloni, P.; Giorgetti,
A.; Rossetti, G. Impact of Cholesterol on the Stability of Monomeric
and Dimeric Forms of the Translocator Protein Tspo: A Molecular
Simulation Study. Molecules 2020, 25, 4299.
(71) Shinzawa-Itoh, K.; Muramoto, K. Biochemical and Crystallographic Studies of Monomeric and Dimeric Bovine Cytochrome C
Oxidase. Biophys. physicobiology 2021, 18, 186−195.
(72) Cremers, C. M.; Knoefler, D.; Vitvitsky, V.; Banerjee, R.; Jakob,
U. Bile Salts Act as Effective Protein-Unfolding Agents and Instigators
of Disulfide Stress in Vivo. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2014, 111,
E1610−E1619.
(73) Ramasarma, T.; Vaigundan, D. Pathways of Electron Transfer
and Proton Translocation in the Action of Superoxide Dismutase
Dimer. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 2019, 514, 772−776.
(74) Banerjee, P.; Bagchi, B. Dynamical Control by Water at a
Molecular Level in Protein Dimer Association and Dissociation. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2020, 117, 2302−2308.
(75) Lin, M. W.; Lin, M. T.; Lin, C. T. Copper/Zinc-Superoxide
Dismutase from Lemon Cdna and Enzyme Stability. J. Agric. Food
Chem. 2002, 50, 7264−7270.
(76) Constantinescu Aruxandei, D.; Makbul, C.; Koturenkiene, A.;
Lüdemann, M. B.; Herrmann, C. Dimerization-Induced Folding of
Mst1 Sarah and the Influence of the Intrinsically Unstructured
Inhibitory Domain: Low Thermodynamic Stability of Monomer.
Biochemistry 2011, 50, 10990−11000.
(77) Xu, Y.; Li, S.; Yan, Z.; Ge, B.; Huang, F.; Yue, T. Revealing
Cooperation between Knotted Conformation and Dimerization in
Protein Stabilization by Molecular Dynamics Simulations. J. Phys.
Chem. Lett. 2019, 10, 5815−5822.
(78) Green, S. M.; Gittis, A. G.; Meeker, A. K.; Lattman, E. E. OneStep Evolution of a Dimer from a Monomeric Protein. Nat. Struct.
Biol. 1995, 2, 746−751.
(79) Zhang, F.; Yuan, Y.; Xiang, M.; Guo, Y.; Li, M.; Liu, Y.; Pu, X.
Molecular Mechanism Regarding Allosteric Modulation of Ligand
Binding and the Impact of Mutations on Dimerization for Ccr5
Homodimer. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 2019, 59, 1965−1976.
(80) Mallam, A. L.; Jackson, S. E. The Dimerization of an Alpha/
Beta-Knotted Protein Is Essential for Structure and Function.
Structure 2007, 15, 111−122.
(81) Kabashima, T.; Li, Y.; Kanada, N.; Ito, K.; Yoshimoto, T.
Enhancement of the Thermal Stability of Pyroglutamyl Peptidase I by
Introduction of an Intersubunit Disulfide Bond. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta, Protein Struct. Mol. Enzymol. 2001, 1547, 214−220.
(82) Fernandez-Lafuente, R. Stabilization of Multimeric Enzymes:
Strategies to Prevent Subunit Dissociation. Enzyme Microb. Technol.
2009, 45, 405−418.
(83) Retnoningrum, D. S.; Yoshida, H.; Razani, M. D.; Muliadi, R.;
Meidianto, V. F.; Artarini, A.; Ismaya, W. T. The Role of S126 in the
Staphylococcus Equorum Mnsod Activity and Stability. J. Struct. Biol.
2021, 213, 107731.
(84) Peimbert, M.; Domínguez-Ramírez, L.; Fernández-Velasco, D.
A. Hydrophobic Repacking of the Dimer Interface of Triosephosphate
Isomerase by in Silico Design and Directed Evolution. Biochemistry
2008, 47, 5556−5564.
(85) Vanella, R.; Ta, D. T.; Nash, M. A. Enzyme-Mediated Hydrogel
Encapsulation of Single Cells for High-Throughput Screening and

Review

Directed Evolution of Oxidoreductases. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 2019, 116,
1878−1886.
(86) Sumbalova, L.; Stourac, J.; Martinek, T.; Bednar, D.;
Damborsky, J. Hotspot Wizard 3.0: Web Server for Automated
Design of Mutations and Smart Libraries Based on Sequence Input
Information. Nucleic Acids Res. 2018, 46, W356−W362.
(87) Ibarra, A. A.; Bartlett, G. J.; Hegedüs, Z.; Dutt, S.; Hobor, F.;
Horner, K. A.; Hetherington, K.; Spence, K.; Nelson, A.; Edwards, T.
A.; et al. Predicting and Experimentally Validating Hot-Spot Residues
at Protein−Protein Interfaces. ACS Chem. Biol. 2019, 14, 2252−2263.
(88) Chen, S.-Y.; Zacharias, M. What Makes a Good Protein−
Protein Interaction Stabilizer: Analysis and Application of the DualBinding Mechanism. ACS Cent. Sci. 2023, 9, 969.
(89) Le Guilloux, V.; Schmidtke, P.; Tuffery, P. Fpocket: An Open
Source Platform for Ligand Pocket Detection. BMC Bioinform. 2009,
10, 168.
(90) Irwin, J. J.; Tang, K. G.; Young, J.; Dandarchuluun, C.; Wong,
B. R.; Khurelbaatar, M.; Moroz, Y. S.; Mayfield, J.; Sayle, R. A.
Zinc20�a Free Ultralarge-Scale Chemical Database for Ligand
Discovery. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 2020, 60, 6065−6073.
(91) Urulangodi, M.; Dhanaraju, R.; Gupta, K.; Roy, R. P.; Bujnicki,
J. M.; Rao, D. N. Asymmetric DNA Methylation by Dimeric Ecop15i
DNA Methyltransferase. Biochimie 2016, 128, 70−82.
(92) Mangiagalli, M.; Barbiroli, A.; Santambrogio, C.; Ferrari, C.;
Nardini, M.; Lotti, M.; Brocca, S. The Activity and Stability of a ColdActive Acylaminoacyl Peptidase Rely on Its Dimerization by Domain
Swapping. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 2021, 181, 263−274.
(93) Hanau, S.; Helliwell, J. R. 6-Phosphogluconate Dehydrogenase
and Its Crystal Structures. Acta Crystallogr. F:Struct. Biol. Commun.
2022, 78, 96−112.
(94) Esparza-Perusquía, M.; Olvera-Sánchez, S.; Pardo, J. P.;
Mendoza-Hernández, G.; Martínez, F.; Flores-Herrera, O. Structural
and Kinetics Characterization of the F(1)F(0)-Atp Synthase Dimer.
New Repercussion of Monomer-Monomer Contact. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta - Bioenerg. 2017, 1858, 975−981.
(95) Park, S. C.; Kim, P. H.; Lee, G. S.; Kang, S. G.; Ko, H. J.; Yoon,
S. I. Structural and Biochemical Characterization of the Bacillus
Cereus 3-Hydroxyisobutyrate Dehydrogenase. Biochem. Biophys. Res.
Commun. 2016, 474, 522−527.
(96) Tsuchiya, D.; Shimizu, N.; Tomita, M. Versatile Architecture of
a Bacterial Aconitase B and Its Catalytic Performance in the
Sequential Reaction Coupled with Isocitrate Dehydrogenase. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta - Proteins Proteom. 2008, 1784, 1847−1856.
(97) Snijder, H.; Ubarretxena-Belandia, I.; Blaauw, M.; Kalk, K.;
Verheij, H.; Egmond, M.; Dekker, N.; Dijkstra, B. Structural Evidence
for Dimerization-Regulated Activation of an Integral Membrane
Phospholipase. Nature 1999, 401, 717−721.
(98) Hor, L.; Dobson, R. C.; Downton, M. T.; Wagner, J.; Hutton,
C. A.; Perugini, M. A. Dimerization of Bacterial Diaminopimelate
Epimerase Is Essential for Catalysis. J. Biol. Chem. 2013, 288, 9238−
9248.
(99) Nocek, B.; Starus, A.; Makowska-Grzyska, M.; Gutierrez, B.;
Sanchez, S.; Jedrzejczak, R.; Mack, J. C.; Olsen, K. W.; Joachimiak, A.;
Holz, R. C. The Dimerization Domain in Dape Enzymes Is Required
for Catalysis. PLoS One 2014, 9, e93593.
(100) Nałȩcz, M. J.; Azzi, A. Functional Characterization of the
Mitochondrial Cytochrome B-C1 Complex: Steady-State Kinetics of
the Monomeric and Dimeric Forms. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 1985,
240, 921−931.
(101) Schliebs, W.; Thanki, N.; Jaenicke, R.; Wierenga, R. K. A
Double Mutation at the Tip of the Dimer Interface Loop of
Triosephosphate Isomerase Generates Active Monomers with
Reduced Stability. Biochemistry 1997, 36, 9655−9662.
(102) Otsuka, F. A.; Chagas, R. S.; Almeida, V. M.; Marana, S. R.
Homodimerization of a Glycoside Hydrolase Family Gh1 ΒGlucosidase Suggests Distinct Activity of Enzyme Different States.
Protein Sci. 2020, 29, 1879−1889.
(103) Renatus, M.; Stennicke, H. R.; Scott, F. L.; Liddington, R. C.;
Salvesen, G. S. Dimer Formation Drives the Activation of the Cell
9969

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.3c00042
Chem. Rev. 2023, 123, 9940−9981

Chemical Reviews

pubs.acs.org/CR

Death Protease Caspase 9. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2001, 98,
14250−14255.
(104) Wortmann, P.; Götz, M.; Hugel, T. Cooperative Nucleotide
Binding in Hsp90 and Its Regulation by Aha1. Biophys. J. 2017, 113,
1711−1718.
(105) Nguyen, B.; Ordabayev, Y.; Sokoloski, J. E.; Weiland, E.;
Lohman, T. M. Large Domain Movements Upon Uvrd Dimerization
and Helicase Activation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2017, 114,
12178−12183.
(106) Rosier, B.; Markvoort, A. J.; Gumí Audenis, B.; Roodhuizen, J.
A. L.; den Hamer, A.; Brunsveld, L.; de Greef, T. F. A. ProximityInduced Caspase-9 Activation on a DNA Origami-Based Synthetic
Apoptosome. Nat. Catal. 2020, 3, 295−306.
(107) Du, F.; Zhang, M.; Li, X.; Yang, C.; Meng, H.; Wang, D.;
Chang, S.; Xu, Y.; Price, B.; Sun, Y. Dimer Monomer Transition and
Dimer Re-Formation Play Important Role for Atm Cellular Function
During DNA Repair. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 2014, 452,
1034−1039.
(108) Wen, Y.; Yang, S.; Wakabayashi, K.; Svensson, M. N. D.;
Stanford, S. M.; Santelli, E.; Bottini, N. Rptpα Phosphatase Activity Is
Allosterically Regulated by the Membrane-Distal Catalytic Domain. J.
Biol. Chem. 2020, 295, 4923−4936.
(109) Morra, G.; Potestio, R.; Micheletti, C.; Colombo, G.
Corresponding Functional Dynamics across the Hsp90 Chaperone
Family: Insights from a Multiscale Analysis of Md Simulations. PLoS
Comput. Biol. 2012, 8, e1002433.
(110) Vettoretti, G.; Moroni, E.; Sattin, S.; Tao, J.; Agard, D. A.;
Bernardi, A.; Colombo, G. Molecular Dynamics Simulations Reveal
the Mechanisms of Allosteric Activation of Hsp90 by Designed
Ligands. Sci. Rep. 2016, 6, 23830.
(111) Liu, P.; Cleveland, T. E. t.; Bouyain, S.; Byrne, P. O.; Longo,
P. A.; Leahy, D. J. A Single Ligand Is Sufficient to Activate Egfr
Dimers. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2012, 109, 10861−10866.
(112) Jiang, G.; den Hertog, J.; Hunter, T. Receptor-Like Protein
Tyrosine Phosphatase Α Homodimerizes on the Cell Surface. Mol.
Cell. Biol. 2000, 20, 5917−5929.
(113) Liess, A. K. L.; Kucerova, A.; Schweimer, K.; Schlesinger, D.;
Dybkov, O.; Urlaub, H.; Mansfeld, J.; Lorenz, S. Dimerization
Regulates the Human Apc/C-Associated Ubiquitin-Conjugating
Enzyme Ube2s. Sci. Signal. 2020, 13, eaba8208.
(114) Rivero-Mü ller, A.; Jonas, K. C.; Hanyaloglu, A. C.;
Huhtaniemi, I. Di/Oligomerization of Gpcrs-Mechanisms and
Functional Significance. Prog. Mol. Biol. Transl. Sci. 2013, 117,
163−185.
(115) Velazhahan, V.; Ma, N.; Vaidehi, N.; Tate, C. G. Activation
Mechanism of the Class D Fungal Gpcr Dimer Ste2. Nature 2022,
603, 743−748.
(116) Reshetnyak, A. V.; Rossi, P.; Myasnikov, A. G.; Sowaileh, M.;
Mohanty, J.; Nourse, A.; Miller, D. J.; Lax, I.; Schlessinger, J.;
Kalodimos, C. G. Mechanism for the Activation of the Anaplastic
Lymphoma Kinase Receptor. Nature 2021, 600, 153−157.
(117) Patel, D.; Kopec, J.; Fitzpatrick, F.; McCorvie, T. J.; Yue, W.
W. Structural Basis for Ligand-Dependent Dimerization of Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Regulatory Domain. Sci. Rep. 2016, 6, 23748.
(118) Richard, J. P. Enzymatic Rate Enhancements: A Review and
Perspective. Biochemistry 2013, 52, 2009−2011.
(119) Sea, K.; Lee, J.; To, D.; Chen, B.; Sazinsky, M. H.; Crane, E. J.,
3rd A Broader Active Site in Pyrococcus Horikoshii Coa Disulfide
Reductase Accommodates Larger Substrates and Reveals Evidence of
Subunit Asymmetry. FEBS Open Bio 2018, 8, 1083−1092.
(120) Chapman, H. N.; Fromme, P.; Barty, A.; White, T. A.; Kirian,
R. A.; Aquila, A.; Hunter, M. S.; Schulz, J.; DePonte, D. P.; Weierstall,
U.; et al. Femtosecond X-Ray Protein Nanocrystallography. Nature
2011, 470, 73−77.
(121) Boehr, D. D.; Dyson, H. J.; Wright, P. E. An Nmr Perspective
on Enzyme Dynamics. Chem. Rev. 2006, 106, 3055−3079.
(122) Manley, G.; Loria, J. P. Nmr Insights into Protein Allostery.
Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 2012, 519, 223−231.

Review

(123) Konermann, L.; Pan, J.; Liu, Y.-H. Hydrogen Exchange Mass
Spectrometry for Studying Protein Structure and Dynamics. Chem.
Soc. Rev. 2011, 40, 1224−1234.
(124) Miles, A. J.; Janes, R. W.; Wallace, B. A. Tools and Methods
for Circular Dichroism Spectroscopy of Proteins: A Tutorial Review.
Chem. Soc. Rev. 2021, 50, 8400−8413.
(125) Brautigam, C. A.; Zhao, H.; Vargas, C.; Keller, S.; Schuck, P.
Integration and Global Analysis of Isothermal Titration Calorimetry
Data for Studying Macromolecular Interactions. Nat. Protoc. 2016, 11,
882−894.
(126) Freyer, M. W.; Lewis, E. A. Isothermal Titration Calorimetry:
Experimental Design, Data Analysis, and Probing Macromolecule/
Ligand Binding and Kinetic Interactions. Methods Cell Biol. 2008, 84,
79−113.
(127) Thompson, M. C.; Barad, B. A.; Wolff, A. M.; Cho, H. S.;
Schotte, F.; Schwarz, D. M.; Anfinrud, P.; Fraser, J. S. TemperatureJump Solution X-Ray Scattering Reveals Distinct Motions in a
Dynamic Enzyme. Nat. Chem. 2019, 11, 1058−1066.
(128) Phintha, A.; Prakinee, K.; Jaruwat, A.; Lawan, N.;
Visitsatthawong, S.; Kantiwiriyawanitch, C.; Songsungthong, W.;
Trisrivirat, D.; Chenprakhon, P.; Mulholland, A.; et al. Dissecting the
Low Catalytic Capability of Flavin-Dependent Halogenases. J. Biol.
Chem. 2021, 296, 100068.
(129) Agarwal, P. K. Role of Protein Dynamics in Reaction Rate
Enhancement by Enzymes. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2005, 127, 15248−
15256.
(130) Whittier, S. K.; Hengge, A. C.; Loria, J. P. Conformational
Motions Regulate Phosphoryl Transfer in Related Protein Tyrosine
Phosphatases. Science 2013, 341, 899−903.
(131) Kamerlin, S. C.; Warshel, A. At the Dawn of the 21st Century:
Is Dynamics the Missing Link for Understanding Enzyme Catalysis?
Proteins 2010, 78, 1339−1375.
(132) Glowacki, D. R.; Harvey, J. N.; Mulholland, A. J. Taking
Ockham’s Razor to Enzyme Dynamics and Catalysis. Nat. Chem.
2012, 4, 169−176.
(133) Nagel, Z. D.; Klinman, J. P. A 21st Century Revisionist’s View
at a Turning Point in Enzymology. Nat. Chem. Biol. 2009, 5, 543−
550.
(134) Maveyraud, L.; Mourey, L. Protein X-Ray Crystallography and
Drug Discovery. Molecules 2020, 25, 1030.
(135) Hasegawa, N.; Jonotsuka, H.; Miki, K.; Takeda, K. X-Ray
Structure Analysis of Bacteriorhodopsin at 1.3 Å Resolution. Sci. Rep.
2018, 8, 13123.
(136) Zhang, L.; Lin, D.; Sun, X.; Curth, U.; Drosten, C.;
Sauerhering, L.; Becker, S.; Rox, K.; Hilgenfeld, R. Crystal structure
of SARS-CoV-2 main protease provides a basis for design of improved
α-ketoamide inhibitors. Science 2020, 368, 409.
(137) Jiang, Y.; Lee, A.; Chen, J.; Ruta, V.; Cadene, M.; Chait, B. T.;
MacKinnon, R. X-Ray Structure of a Voltage-Dependent K+ Channel.
Nature 2003, 423, 33−41.
(138) Lin, H. Y.; Yang, J. F.; Wang, D. W.; Hao, G. F.; Dong, J. Q.;
Wang, Y. X.; Yang, W. C.; Wu, J. W.; Zhan, C. G.; Yang, G. F.
Molecular Insights into the Mechanism of 4-Hydroxyphenylpyruvate
Dioxygenase Inhibition: Enzyme Kinetics, X-Ray Crystallography and
Computational Simulations. FEBS J. 2019, 286, 975−990.
(139) Dunkle, J. A.; Bruno, M. R.; Outten, F. W.; Frantom, P. A.
Structural Evidence for Dimer-Interface-Driven Regulation of the
Type Ii Cysteine Desulfurase. Sufs. Biochemistry 2019, 58, 687−696.
(140) Günther, S.; Reinke, P. Y.; Fernández-García, Y.; Lieske, J.;
Lane, T. J.; Ginn, H. M.; Koua, F. H.; Ehrt, C.; Ewert, W.; Oberthuer,
D.; et al. X-Ray Screening Identifies Active Site and Allosteric
Inhibitors of Sars-Cov-2 Main Protease. Science 2021, 372, 642−646.
(141) Wattenberg, B. W. Kicking Off Sphingolipid Biosynthesis:
Structures of the Serine Palmitoyltransferase Complex. Nat. Struct.
Mol. Biol. 2021, 28, 229−231.
(142) Schlichting, I. Serial Femtosecond Crystallography: The First
Five Years. IUCrJ. 2015, 2, 246−255.
9970

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.3c00042
Chem. Rev. 2023, 123, 9940−9981

Chemical Reviews

pubs.acs.org/CR

Review

(163) Hill, A. V. The Possible Effects of the Aggregation of the
Molecules of Haemoglobin on Its Dissociation Curves. Proc. Physiol.
Soc. 1910, 40, 4−7.
(164) Einav, T.; Mazutis, L.; Phillips, R. Statistical Mechanics of
Allosteric Enzymes. J. Phys. Chem. B 2016, 120, 6021−6037.
(165) Monod, J.; Wyman, J.; Changeux, J. P. On the Nature of
Allosteric Transitions: A Plausible Model. J. Mol. Biol. 1965, 12, 88−
118.
(166) Wielgus-Kutrowska, B.; Bzowska, A. Probing the Mechanism
of Purine Nucleoside Phosphorylase by Steady-State Kinetic Studies
and Ligand Binding Characterization Determined by Fluorimetric
Titrations. Biochim. Biophys. Acta - Proteins Proteom. 2006, 1764,
887−902.
(167) Punekar, N. Es Complex and Pre-Steady-State Kinetics. In
Enzymes: Catalysis, Kinetics and Mechanisms; Springer, 2018; pp 107−
114.
(168) Bhattacharyya, S.; Bershtein, S.; Adkar, B. V.; Woodard, J.;
Shakhnovich, E. I. Metabolic Response to Point Mutations Reveals
Principles of Modulation of in Vivo Enzyme Activity and Phenotype.
Mol. Syst. Biol. 2021, 17, e10200.
(169) Stokes, E. S.; Gilchrist, M. L.; Calhoun, D. H. Prediction of
Improved Therapeutics for Fabry Disease Patients Generated by
Mutagenesis of the Α-Galactosidase a Active Site, Dimer Interface,
and Glycosylation Region. Protein Expr. Purif. 2020, 175, 105710.
(170) Scrutton, N. S.; Deonarain, M. P.; Berry, A.; Peiham, R. N.
Hybrid Molecules of Glutathione Reductase: Tools for Investigating
Protein Interactions at the Dimer Interface. In Flavins and
Flavoproteins 1993; De Gruyter, 2020; pp 485−492.
(171) Dainese, E.; Oddi, S.; Simonetti, M.; Sabatucci, A.; Angelucci,
C. B.; Ballone, A.; Dufrusine, B.; Fezza, F.; De Fabritiis, G.;
Maccarrone, M. The Endocannabinoid Hydrolase Faah Is an
Allosteric Enzyme. Sci. Rep. 2020, 10, 5903.
(172) Douzi, B. Protein−Protein Interactions: Surface Plasmon
Resonance. In Bacterial Protein Secretion Systems; Springer, 2017; pp
257−275.
(173) Barbour, R.; Bova, M. P. Combining Label-Free Technologies:
Discovery in Strength. Bioanalysis 2012, 4, 619−622.
(174) Seidel, S. A.; Wienken, C. J.; Geissler, S.; Jerabek-Willemsen,
M.; Duhr, S.; Reiter, A.; Trauner, D.; Braun, D.; Baaske, P. Label-Free
Microscale Thermophoresis Discriminates Sites and Affinity of
Protein−Ligand Binding. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2012, 51, 10656−
10659.
(175) Lee, A. L.; Sapienza, P. J. Thermodynamic and Nmr
Assessment of Ligand Cooperativity and Intersubunit Communication in Symmetric Dimers: Application to Thymidylate Synthase.
Front. Mol. Biosci. 2018, 5, 47.
(176) Falk, B. T.; Sapienza, P. J.; Lee, A. L. Chemical Shift Imprint
of Intersubunit Communication in a Symmetric Homodimer. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2016, 113, 9533−9538.
(177) Sapienza, P. J.; Falk, B. T.; Lee, A. L. Bacterial Thymidylate
Synthase Binds Two Molecules of Substrate and Cofactor without
Cooperativity. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2015, 137, 14260−14263.
(178) Perilla, J. R.; Goh, B. C.; Cassidy, C. K.; Liu, B.; Bernardi, R.
C.; Rudack, T.; Yu, H.; Wu, Z.; Schulten, K. Molecular Dynamics
Simulations of Large Macromolecular Complexes. Curr. Opin. Struct.
Biol. 2015, 31, 64−74.
(179) Lindorff-Larsen, K.; Maragakis, P.; Piana, S.; Shaw, D. E.
Picosecond to Millisecond Structural Dynamics in Human Ubiquitin.
J. Phys. Chem. B 2016, 120, 8313−8320.
(180) Jung, J.; Nishima, W.; Daniels, M.; Bascom, G.; Kobayashi, C.;
Adedoyin, A.; Wall, M.; Lappala, A.; Phillips, D.; Fischer, W.; et al.
Scaling Molecular Dynamics Beyond 100,000 Processor Cores for
Large-Scale Biophysical Simulations. J. Comput. Chem. 2019, 40,
1919−1930.
(181) Shaw, D. E.; Maragakis, P.; Lindorff-Larsen, K.; Piana, S.;
Dror, R. O.; Eastwood, M. P.; Bank, J. A.; Jumper, J. M.; Salmon, J. K.;
Shan, Y.; et al. Atomic-Level Characterization of the Structural
Dynamics of Proteins. Science 2010, 330, 341−346.

(143) Bai, X.-C.; McMullan, G.; Scheres, S. H. How Cryo-Em Is
Revolutionizing Structural Biology. Trends Biochem. Sci. 2015, 40,
49−57.
(144) Nannenga, B. L.; Gonen, T. The Cryo-Em Method
Microcrystal Electron Diffraction (Microed). Nat. Methods 2019,
16, 369−379.
(145) Kono, F.; Tamada, T. Neutron Crystallography for the
Elucidation of Enzyme Catalysis. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 2021, 71,
36−42.
(146) Yabukarski, F.; Doukov, T.; Pinney, M. M.; Biel, J. T.; Fraser,
J. S.; Herschlag, D. Ensemble-Function Relationships to Dissect
Mechanisms of Enzyme Catalysis. Sci. Adv. 2022, 8, eabn7738.
(147) Keedy, D. A.; Kenner, L. R.; Warkentin, M.; Woldeyes, R. A.;
Hopkins, J. B.; Thompson, M. C.; Brewster, A. S.; Van Benschoten, A.
H.; Baxter, E. L.; Uervirojnangkoorn, M.; et al. Mapping the
Conformational Landscape of a Dynamic Enzyme by Multitemperature and Xfel Crystallography. Elife 2015, 4, No. e07574.
(148) Fraser, J. S.; Clarkson, M. W.; Degnan, S. C.; Erion, R.; Kern,
D.; Alber, T. Hidden Alternative Structures of Proline Isomerase
Essential for Catalysis. Nature 2009, 462, 669−673.
(149) Schulz, E. C.; Mehrabi, P.; Müller-Werkmeister, H. M.;
Tellkamp, F.; Jha, A.; Stuart, W.; Persch, E.; De Gasparo, R.;
Diederich, F.; Pai, E. F.; et al. The Hit-and-Return System Enables
Efficient Time-Resolved Serial Synchrotron Crystallography. Nat.
Methods 2018, 15, 901−904.
(150) Mazal, H.; Haran, G. Single-Molecule Fret Methods to Study
the Dynamics of Proteins at Work. Curr. Opin. Biomed. Eng. 2019, 12,
8−17.
(151) Gouridis, G.; Schuurman-Wolters, G. K.; Ploetz, E.; Husada,
F.; Vietrov, R.; de Boer, M.; Cordes, T.; Poolman, B. Conformational
Dynamics in Substrate-Binding Domains Influences Transport in the
Abc Importer Glnpq. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 2015, 22, 57−64.
(152) Hu, Y.; Cheng, K.; He, L.; Zhang, X.; Jiang, B.; Jiang, L.; Li,
C.; Wang, G.; Yang, Y.; Liu, M. Nmr-Based Methods for Protein
Analysis. Anal. Chem. 2021, 93, 1866−1879.
(153) Palmer, A. G., III Nmr Characterization of the Dynamics of
Biomacromolecules. Chem. Rev. 2004, 104, 3623−3640.
(154) Fawzi, N. L.; Ying, J.; Torchia, D. A.; Clore, G. M. Kinetics of
Amyloid Β Monomer-to-Oligomer Exchange by Nmr Relaxation. J.
Am. Chem. Soc. 2010, 132, 9948−9951.
(155) McConnell, S. A.; McAllister, R. A.; Amer, B. R.; Mahoney, B.
J.; Sue, C. K.; Chang, C.; Ton-That, H.; Clubb, R. T. SortaseAssembled Pili in Corynebacterium Diphtheriae Are Built Using a
Latch Mechanism. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2021, 118,
e2019649118.
(156) Boehr, D. D.; McElheny, D.; Dyson, H. J.; Wright, P. E. The
Dynamic Energy Landscape of Dihydrofolate Reductase Catalysis.
Science 2006, 313, 1638−1642.
(157) Stiller, J. B.; Kerns, S. J.; Hoemberger, M.; Cho, Y. J.; Otten,
R.; Hagan, M. F.; Kern, D. Probing the Transition State in Enzyme
Catalysis by High-Pressure Nmr Dynamics. Nat. Catal. 2019, 2, 726−
734.
(158) Stiller, J. B.; Otten, R.; Häussinger, D.; Rieder, P. S.;
Theobald, D. L.; Kern, D. Structure Determination of High-Energy
States in a Dynamic Protein Ensemble. Nature 2022, 603, 528−535.
(159) Shen, Y.; Bax, A. Sparta+: A Modest Improvement in
Empirical Nmr Chemical Shift Prediction by Means of an Artificial
Neural Network. J. Biomol. NMR 2010, 48, 13−22.
(160) Kliger, D. S.; Chen, E.; Goldbeck, R. A. Probing Kinetic
Mechanisms of Protein Function and Folding with Time-Resolved
Natural and Magnetic Chiroptical Spectroscopies. Int. J. Mol. Sci.
2012, 13, 683−697.
(161) Woody, R. W. The Development and Current State of Protein
Circular Dichroism. Biomed Spectrosc Imaging 2015, 4, 5−34.
(162) Deichmann, U.; Schuster, S.; Mazat, J. P.; Cornish-Bowden, A.
Commemorating the 1913 Michaelis−Menten Paper Die Kinetik Der
Invertinwirkung: Three Perspectives. FEBS J. 2014, 281, 435−463.
9971

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.3c00042
Chem. Rev. 2023, 123, 9940−9981

Chemical Reviews

pubs.acs.org/CR

(182) Shaw, D. E.; Deneroff, M. M.; Dror, R. O.; Kuskin, J. S.;
Larson, R. H.; Salmon, J. K.; Young, C.; Batson, B.; Bowers, K. J.;
Chao, J. C.; et al. Anton, a Special-Purpose Machine for Molecular
Dynamics Simulation. Commun. ACM 2008, 51, 91−97.
(183) Dommer, A.; Casalino, L.; Kearns, F.; Rosenfeld, M.; Wauer,
N.; Ahn, S. H.; Russo, J.; Oliveira, S.; Morris, C.; Bogetti, A.; et al.
#Covidisairborne: Ai-Enabled Multiscale Computational Microscopy
of Delta Sars-Cov-2 in a Respiratory Aerosol. Int. J. High Perform.
Comput. Appl. 2023, 37, 28−44.
(184) Liu, J.; Zhu, T.; Wang, X.; He, X.; Zhang, J. Z. H. Quantum
Fragment Based Ab Initio Molecular Dynamics for Proteins. J. Chem.
Theory Comput. 2015, 11, 5897−5905.
(185) Ahmadi, S.; Barrios Herrera, L.; Chehelamirani, M.; Hostaš, J.;
Jalife, S.; Salahub, D. R. Multiscale Modeling of Enzymes: QmCluster, Qm/Mm, and Qm/Mm/Md: A Tutorial Review. Int. J.
Quantum Chem. 2018, 118, e25558.
(186) Vennelakanti, V.; Nazemi, A.; Mehmood, R.; Steeves, A. H.;
Kulik, H. J. Harder, Better, Faster, Stronger: Large-Scale Qm and
Qm/Mm for Predictive Modeling in Enzymes and Proteins. Curr.
Opin. Struct. Biol. 2022, 72, 9−17.
(187) Maier, J. A.; Martinez, C.; Kasavajhala, K.; Wickstrom, L.;
Hauser, K. E.; Simmerling, C. Ff14sb: Improving the Accuracy of
Protein Side Chain and Backbone Parameters from Ff99sb. J. Chem.
Theory Comput. 2015, 11, 3696−3713.
(188) Tian, C.; Kasavajhala, K.; Belfon, K. A.; Raguette, L.; Huang,
H.; Migues, A. N.; Bickel, J.; Wang, Y.; Pincay, J.; Wu, Q.; et al.
Ff19sb: Amino-Acid-Specific Protein Backbone Parameters Trained
against Quantum Mechanics Energy Surfaces in Solution. J. Chem.
Theory Comput. 2020, 16, 528−552.
(189) Abraham, M. J.; Murtola, T.; Schulz, R.; Páll, S.; Smith, J. C.;
Hess, B.; Lindahl, E. Gromacs: High Performance Molecular
Simulations through Multi-Level Parallelism from Laptops to
Supercomputers. SoftwareX 2015, 1, 19−25.
(190) Schmid, N.; Eichenberger, A. P.; Choutko, A.; Riniker, S.;
Winger, M.; Mark, A. E.; van Gunsteren, W. F. Definition and Testing
of the Gromos Force-Field Versions 54a7 and 54b7. Eur. Biophys. J.
2011, 40, 843−856.
(191) Brooks, B. R.; Brooks, C. L., III; Mackerell, A. D., Jr; Nilsson,
L.; Petrella, R. J.; Roux, B.; Won, Y.; Archontis, G.; Bartels, C.;
Boresch, S.; et al. Charmm: The Biomolecular Simulation Program. J.
Comput. Chem. 2009, 30, 1545−1614.
(192) Huang, J.; MacKerell, A. D., Jr Charmm36 All-Atom Additive
Protein Force Field: Validation Based on Comparison to Nmr Data. J.
Comput. Chem. 2013, 34, 2135−2145.
(193) Marrink, S. J.; Risselada, H. J.; Yefimov, S.; Tieleman, D. P.;
De Vries, A. H. The Martini Force Field: Coarse Grained Model for
Biomolecular Simulations. J. Phys. Chem. B 2007, 111, 7812−7824.
(194) Darré, L.; Machado, M. R.; Brandner, A. F.; González, H. C.;
Ferreira, S.; Pantano, S. Sirah: A Structurally Unbiased CoarseGrained Force Field for Proteins with Aqueous Solvation and LongRange Electrostatics. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2015, 11, 723−739.
(195) Davtyan, A.; Schafer, N. P.; Zheng, W.; Clementi, C.;
Wolynes, P. G.; Papoian, G. A. Awsem-Md: Protein Structure
Prediction Using Coarse-Grained Physical Potentials and Bioinformatically Based Local Structure Biasing. J. Phys. Chem. B 2012, 116,
8494−8503.
(196) Wu, H.; Wolynes, P. G.; Papoian, G. A. Awsem-Idp: A CoarseGrained Force Field for Intrinsically Disordered Proteins. J. Phys.
Chem. B 2018, 122, 11115−11125.
(197) Wang, J.; Wolf, R. M.; Caldwell, J. W.; Kollman, P. A.; Case,
D. A. Development and Testing of a General Amber Force Field. J.
Comput. Chem. 2004, 25, 1157−1174.
(198) Kirschner, K. N.; Yongye, A. B.; Tschampel, S. M.; GonzálezOuteiriño, J.; Daniels, C. R.; Foley, B. L.; Woods, R. J. Glycam06: A
Generalizable Biomolecular Force Field. Carbohydrates. J. Comput.
Chem. 2008, 29, 622−655.
(199) Kang, W.; Jiang, F.; Wu, Y. D. Universal Implementation of a
Residue-Specific Force Field Based on Cmap Potentials and Free

Review

Energy Decomposition. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2018, 14, 4474−
4486.
(200) Li, S.; Elcock, A. H. Residue-Specific Force Field (Rsff2)
Improves the Modeling of Conformational Behavior of Peptides and
Proteins. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2015, 6, 2127−2133.
(201) Geng, H.; Jiang, F.; Wu, Y. D. Accurate Structure Prediction
and Conformational Analysis of Cyclic Peptides with Residue-Specific
Force Fields. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2016, 7, 1805−1810.
(202) Kästner, J. Umbrella Sampling. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Comput.
Mol. Sci. 2011, 1, 932−942.
(203) Barducci, A.; Bonomi, M.; Parrinello, M. Metadynamics. Wiley
Interdiscip. Rev. Comput. Mol. Sci. 2011, 1, 826−843.
(204) Lee, J.; Scheraga, H. A.; Rackovsky, S. New Optimization
Method for Conformational Energy Calculations on Polypeptides:
Conformational Space Annealing. J. Comput. Chem. 1997, 18, 1222−
1232.
(205) Sugita, Y.; Okamoto, Y. Replica-Exchange Molecular
Dynamics Method for Protein Folding. Chem. Phys. Lett. 1999, 314,
141−151.
(206) Hamelberg, D.; Mongan, J.; McCammon, J. A. Accelerated
Molecular Dynamics: A Promising and Efficient Simulation Method
for Biomolecules. J. Chem. Phys. 2004, 120, 11919−11929.
(207) Yang, L.; Qin Gao, Y. A Selective Integrated Tempering
Method. J. Chem. Phys. 2009, 131, 214109.
(208) Yang, Y. I.; Niu, H.; Parrinello, M. Combining Metadynamics
and Integrated Tempering Sampling. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2018, 9,
6426−6430.
(209) Feng, J. J.; Chen, J. N.; Kang, W.; Wu, Y. D. Accurate
Structure Prediction for Protein Loops Based on Molecular Dynamics
Simulations with Rsff2c. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2021, 17, 4614−
4628.
(210) Yang, Y. I.; Shao, Q.; Zhang, J.; Yang, L.; Gao, Y. Q. Enhanced
Sampling in Molecular Dynamics. J. Chem. Phys. 2019, 151,
No. 070902.
(211) Wang, D.; Wang, Y.; Chang, J.; Zhang, L.; Wang, H.; E, W.
Efficient Sampling of High-Dimensional Free Energy Landscapes
Using Adaptive Reinforced Dynamics. Nat. Comput. Sci. 2022, 2, 20−
29.
(212) Kitchen, D. B.; Decornez, H.; Furr, J. R.; Bajorath, J. Docking
and Scoring in Virtual Screening for Drug Discovery: Methods and
Applications. Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery 2004, 3, 935−949.
(213) Cheng, T.; Li, X.; Li, Y.; Liu, Z.; Wang, R. Comparative
Assessment of Scoring Functions on a Diverse Test Set. J. Chem. Inf.
Model. 2009, 49, 1079−1093.
(214) Ahmad, K.; Rizzi, A.; Capelli, R.; Mandelli, D.; Lyu, W.;
Carloni, P. Enhanced-Sampling Simulations for the Estimation of
Ligand Binding Kinetics: Current Status and Perspective. Front. Mol.
Biosci. 2022, 9, 899805.
(215) Chen, R.; Li, L.; Weng, Z. Zdock: An Initial-Stage ProteinDocking Algorithm. Proteins 2003, 52, 80−87.
(216) Lyskov, S.; Gray, J. J. The Rosettadock Server for Local
Protein−Protein Docking. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008, 36, W233−W238.
(217) Dominguez, C.; Boelens, R.; Bonvin, A. M. Haddock: A
Protein− Protein Docking Approach Based on Biochemical or
Biophysical Information. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2003, 125, 1731−1737.
(218) Zeng, H.; Wang, S.; Zhou, T.; Zhao, F.; Li, X.; Wu, Q.; Xu, J.
Complexcontact: A Web Server for Inter-Protein Contact Prediction
Using Deep Learning. Nucleic Acids Res. 2018, 46, W432−W437.
(219) Gao, M.; Nakajima An, D.; Parks, J. M.; Skolnick, J.
Af2complex Predicts Direct Physical Interactions in Multimeric
Proteins with Deep Learning. Nat. Commun. 2022, 13, 1744.
(220) Gilabert, J. F.; Gracia Carmona, O.; Hogner, A.; Guallar, V.
Combining Monte Carlo and Molecular Dynamics Simulations for
Enhanced Binding Free Energy Estimation through Markov State
Models. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 2020, 60, 5529−5539.
(221) Buch, I.; Giorgino, T.; De Fabritiis, G. Complete
Reconstruction of an Enzyme-Inhibitor Binding Process by Molecular
Dynamics Simulations. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2011, 108,
10184−10189.
9972

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.3c00042
Chem. Rev. 2023, 123, 9940−9981

Chemical Reviews

pubs.acs.org/CR

(222) Genheden, S.; Ryde, U. The Mm/Pbsa and Mm/Gbsa
Methods to Estimate Ligand-Binding Affinities. Expert Opin. Drug
Delivery 2015, 10, 449−461.
(223) de Amorim, H. L. N.; Caceres, R. A.; Netz, P. A. Linear
Interaction Energy (Lie) Method in Lead Discovery and Optimization. Curr. Drug Targets 2008, 9, 1100−1105.
(224) Jorge, M.; Garrido, N. M.; Queimada, A. J.; Economou, I. G.;
Macedo, E. A. Effect of the Integration Method on the Accuracy and
Computational Efficiency of Free Energy Calculations Using
Thermodynamic Integration. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2010, 6,
1018−1027.
(225) Wang, L.; Chambers, J.; Abel, R. Protein-Ligand Binding Free
Energy Calculations with Fep. Methods Mol. Biol. 2019, 2022, 201−
232.
(226) Steinbrecher, T. B.; Dahlgren, M.; Cappel, D.; Lin, T.; Wang,
L.; Krilov, G.; Abel, R.; Friesner, R.; Sherman, W. Accurate Binding
Free Energy Predictions in Fragment Optimization. J. Chem. Inf.
Model. 2015, 55, 2411−2420.
(227) Du, Z.; Comer, J.; Li, Y. Bioinformatics Approaches to
Discovering Food-Derived Bioactive Peptides: Reviews and Perspectives. TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem. 2023, 162, 117051.
(228) Wan, S.; Bhati, A. P.; Zasada, S. J.; Coveney, P. V. Rapid,
Accurate, Precise and Reproducible Ligand-Protein Binding Free
Energy Prediction. Interface Focus 2020, 10, 20200007.
(229) Zhang, H.; Liao, L.; Saravanan, K. M.; Yin, P.; Wei, Y.
Deepbindrg: A Deep Learning Based Method for Estimating Effective
Protein−Ligand Affinity. PeerJ. 2019, 7, e7362.
(230) Ö ztürk, H.; Ö zgür, A.; Ozkirimli, E. Deepdta: Deep Drug−
Target Binding Affinity Prediction. Bioinformatics 2018, 34, i821−
i829.
(231) Jiménez, J.; Š kalič, M.; Martínez-Rosell, G.; De Fabritiis, G.
Kdeep: Protein−Ligand Absolute Binding Affinity Prediction Via 3dConvolutional Neural Networks. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 2018, 58, 287−
296.
(232) Demapan, D.; Kussmann, J. r.; Ochsenfeld, C.; Cui, Q. Factors
That Determine the Variation of Equilibrium and Kinetic Properties
of Qm/Mm Enzyme Simulations: Qm Region, Conformation, and
Boundary Condition. J. Chem. Theory Comput 2022, 18, 2530−2542.
(233) Manley, G.; Rivalta, I.; Loria, J. P. Solution Nmr and
Computational Methods for Understanding Protein Allostery. J. Phys.
Chem. B 2013, 117, 3063−3073.
(234) Cavalli, A.; Salvatella, X.; Dobson, C. M.; Vendruscolo, M.
Protein Structure Determination from Nmr Chemical Shifts. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2007, 104, 9615−9620.
(235) Clore, G. M. Visualizing Lowly-Populated Regions of the Free
Energy Landscape of Macromolecular Complexes by Paramagnetic
Relaxation Enhancement. Mol. Biosyst. 2008, 4, 1058−1069.
(236) Lindorff-Larsen, K.; Best, R. B.; DePristo, M. A.; Dobson, C.
M.; Vendruscolo, M. Simultaneous Determination of Protein
Structure and Dynamics. Nature 2005, 433, 128−132.
(237) Verkhivker, G. M.; Agajanian, S.; Hu, G.; Tao, P. Allosteric
Regulation at the Crossroads of New Technologies: Multiscale
Modeling, Networks, and Machine Learning. Front. Mol. Biosci. 2020,
7, 136.
(238) Lu, S.; He, X.; Yang, Z.; Chai, Z.; Zhou, S.; Wang, J.; Rehman,
A. U.; Ni, D.; Pu, J.; Sun, J.; et al. Activation Pathway of a G ProteinCoupled Receptor Uncovers Conformational Intermediates as
Targets for Allosteric Drug Design. Nat. Commun. 2021, 12, 4721.
(239) Taylor, B. C.; Lee, C. T.; Amaro, R. E. Structural Basis for
Ligand Modulation of the Ccr2 Conformational Landscape. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2019, 116, 8131−8136.
(240) Sengupta, U.; Strodel, B. Markov Models for the Elucidation
of Allosteric Regulation. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, B, Biol. Sci.
2018, 373, 20170178.
(241) Molgedey, L.; Schuster, H. G. Separation of a Mixture of
Independent Signals Using Time Delayed Correlations. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 1994, 72, 3634−3637.

Review

(242) Glielmo, A.; Husic, B. E.; Rodriguez, A.; Clementi, C.; Noé,
F.; Laio, A. Unsupervised Learning Methods for Molecular Simulation
Data. Chem. Rev. 2021, 121, 9722−9758.
(243) MacFadyen, J.; Andricioaei, I. A Skewed-Momenta Method to
Efficiently Generate Conformational-Transition Trajectories. Chem.
Phys. 2005, 123, No. 074107.
(244) Mendels, D.; Piccini, G.; Parrinello, M. Collective Variables
from Local Fluctuations. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2018, 9, 2776−2781.
(245) Zhou, H.; Dong, Z.; Tao, P. Recognition of Protein Allosteric
States and Residues: Machine Learning Approaches. J. Comput. Chem.
2018, 39, 1481−1490.
(246) Zhang, J.; Lei, Y.-K.; Che, X.; Zhang, Z.; Yang, Y. I.; Gao, Y.
Q. Deep Representation Learning for Complex Free-Energy Landscapes. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2019, 10, 5571.
(247) Oliveira, A. S. F.; Edsall, C. J.; Woods, C. J.; Bates, P.; Nunez,
G. V.; Wonnacott, S.; Bermudez, I.; Ciccotti, G.; Gallagher, T.;
Sessions, R. B.; et al. A General Mechanism for Signal Propagation in
the Nicotinic Acetylcholine Receptor Family. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2019,
141, 19953−19958.
(248) Galdadas, I.; Qu, S.; Oliveira, A. S. F.; Olehnovics, E.; Mack,
A. R.; Mojica, M. F.; Agarwal, P. K.; Tooke, C. L.; Gervasio, F. L.;
Spencer, J.; et al. Allosteric Communication in Class a Β-Lactamases
Occurs Via Cooperative Coupling of Loop Dynamics. Elife 2021, 10,
e66567.
(249) Tehver, R.; Chen, J.; Thirumalai, D. Allostery Wiring
Diagrams in the Transitions That Drive the Groel Reaction Cycle.
J. Mol. Biol. 2009, 387, 390−406.
(250) Felline, A.; Seeber, M.; Fanelli, F. Webpsn V2. 0: A Webserver
to Infer Fingerprints of Structural Communication in Biomacromolecules. Nucleic Acids Res. 2020, 48, W94−W103.
(251) Tiwari, S. P.; Fuglebakk, E.; Hollup, S. M.; Skjærven, L.;
Cragnolini, T.; Grindhaug, S. H.; Tekle, K. M.; Reuter, N. Webnm@
V2.0: Web Server and Services for Comparing Protein Flexibility.
BMC Bioinform 2014, 15, 427.
(252) Van Wart, A. T.; Durrant, J.; Votapka, L.; Amaro, R. E.
Weighted Implementation of Suboptimal Paths (Wisp): An
Optimized Algorithm and Tool for Dynamical Network Analysis. J.
Chem. Theory Comput. 2014, 10, 511−517.
(253) Li, Q.; Luo, R.; Chen, H.-F. Dynamical Important Residue
Network (Dirn): Network Inference Via Conformational Change.
Bioinformatics 2019, 35, 4664−4670.
(254) Ashkinadze, D.; Klukowski, P.; Kadavath, H.; Güntert, P.;
Riek, R. Pdbcor: An Automated Correlation Extraction Calculator for
Multi-State Protein Structures. Structure 2022, 30, 646−652.
(255) Palermo, G.; Ricci, C. G.; Fernando, A.; Basak, R.; Jinek, M.;
Rivalta, I.; Batista, V. S.; McCammon, J. A. Protospacer Adjacent
Motif-Induced Allostery Activates Crispr-Cas9. J. Am. Chem. Soc.
2017, 139, 16028−16031.
(256) McClendon, C. L.; Friedland, G.; Mobley, D. L.; Amirkhani,
H.; Jacobson, M. P. Quantifying Correlations between Allosteric Sites
in Thermodynamic Ensembles. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2009, 5,
2486−2502.
(257) McClendon, C. L.; Hua, L.; Barreiro, A.; Jacobson, M. P.
Comparing Conformational Ensembles Using the Kullback-Leibler
Divergence Expansion. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2012, 8, 2115−2126.
(258) McClendon, C. L.; Kornev, A. P.; Gilson, M. K.; Taylor, S. S.
Dynamic Architecture of a Protein Kinase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
2014, 111, E4623−E4631.
(259) Ahuja, L. G.; Aoto, P. C.; Kornev, A. P.; Veglia, G.; Taylor, S.
S. Dynamic Allostery-Based Molecular Workings of Kinase:Peptide
Complexes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2019, 116, 15052−15061.
(260) Dijkstra, E. W. A Note on Two Problems in Connexion with
Graphs. Numer. Math. 1959, 1, 269−271.
(261) Atilgan, A. R.; Durell, S.; Jernigan, R. L.; Demirel, M. C.;
Keskin, O.; Bahar, I. Anisotropy of Fluctuation Dynamics of Proteins
with an Elastic Network Model. Biophys. J. 2001, 80, 505−515.
(262) Huang, Q.; Song, P.; Chen, Y.; Liu, Z.; Lai, L. Allosteric Type
and Pathways Are Governed by the Forces of Protein−Ligand
Binding. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2021, 12, 5404−5412.
9973

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.3c00042
Chem. Rev. 2023, 123, 9940−9981

Chemical Reviews

pubs.acs.org/CR

(263) Atilgan, C.; Atilgan, A. R. Perturbation-Response Scanning
Reveals Ligand Entry-Exit Mechanisms of Ferric Binding Protein.
PLoS Comput. Biol. 2009, 5, e1000544.
(264) Gerek, Z. N.; Ozkan, S. B. Change in Allosteric Network
Affects Binding Affinities of Pdz Domains: Analysis through
Perturbation Response Scanning. PLoS Comput. Biol. 2011, 7,
e1002154.
(265) Liang, Z.; Verkhivker, G. M.; Hu, G. Integration of Network
Models and Evolutionary Analysis into High-Throughput Modeling of
Protein Dynamics and Allosteric Regulation: Theory, Tools and
Applications. Brief. Bioinform. 2020, 21, 815−835.
(266) Hacisuleyman, A.; Erman, B. Entropy Transfer between
Residue Pairs and Allostery in Proteins: Quantifying Allosteric
Communication in Ubiquitin. PLoS Comput. Biol. 2017, 13,
e1005319.
(267) Hacisuleyman, A.; Erman, B. Causality, Transfer Entropy, and
Allosteric Communication Landscapes in Proteins with Harmonic
Interactions. Proteins 2017, 85, 1056−1064.
(268) Lange, O. F.; Grubmüller, H. Generalized Correlation for
Biomolecular Dynamics. Proteins 2006, 62, 1053−1061.
(269) Van Den Bedem, H.; Bhabha, G.; Yang, K.; Wright, P. E.;
Fraser, J. S. Automated Identification of Functional Dynamic Contact
Networks from X-Ray Crystallography. Nat. Methods 2013, 10, 896−
902.
(270) Zhu, J.; Wang, J.; Han, W.; Xu, D. Neural Relational Inference
to Learn Long-Range Allosteric Interactions in Proteins from
Molecular Dynamics Simulations. Nat. Commun. 2022, 13, 1661.
(271) Torgeson, K. R.; Clarkson, M. W.; Granata, D.; LindorffLarsen, K.; Page, R.; Peti, W. Conserved Conformational Dynamics
Determine Enzyme Activity. Sci. Adv. 2022, 8, eabo5546.
(272) Granata, D.; Ponzoni, L.; Micheletti, C.; Carnevale, V.
Patterns of Coevolving Amino Acids Unveil Structural and Dynamical
Domains. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2017, 114, E10612−E10621.
(273) Buchenberg, S.; Sittel, F.; Stock, G. Time-Resolved
Observation of Protein Allosteric Communication. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 2017, 114, E6804−E6811.
(274) Henzler-Wildman, K. A.; Lei, M.; Thai, V.; Kerns, S. J.;
Karplus, M.; Kern, D. A Hierarchy of Timescales in Protein Dynamics
Is Linked to Enzyme Catalysis. Nature 2007, 450, 913−916.
(275) Benkovic, S. J.; Hammes-Schiffer, S. A Perspective on Enzyme
Catalysis. Science 2003, 301, 1196−1202.
(276) Osuna, S.; Jiménez-Osés, G.; Noey, E. L.; Houk, K. N.
Molecular Dynamics Explorations of Active Site Structure in
Designed and Evolved Enzymes. Acc. Chem. Res. 2015, 48, 1080−
1089.
(277) Yuan, Y.; Tam, M. F.; Simplaceanu, V.; Ho, C. New Look at
Hemoglobin Allostery. Chem. Rev. 2015, 115, 1702−1724.
(278) Koshland, D. E., Jr The Key−Lock Theory and the Induced
Fit Theory. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 1995, 33, 2375−2378.
(279) Tsai, C.-J.; Nussinov, R. A Unified View of “How Allostery
Works. PLoS Comput. Biol. 2014, 10, e1003394.
(280) Changeux, J.-P. Allostery and the Monod-Wyman-Changeux
Model after 50 Years. Annu. Rev. Biophys. 2012, 41, 103−133.
(281) Koshland, D., Jr; Nemethy, G.; Filmer, D. Comparison of
Experimental Binding Data and Theoretical Models in Proteins
Containing Subunits. Biochemistry 1966, 5, 365−385.
(282) Vogt, A. D.; Di Cera, E. Conformational Selection or Induced
Fit? A Critical Appraisal of the Kinetic Mechanism. Biochemistry 2012,
51, 5894−5902.
(283) Yang, L.-P.; Zhang, L.; Quan, M.; Ward, J. S.; Ma, Y.-L.; Zhou,
H.; Rissanen, K.; Jiang, W. A Supramolecular System That Strictly
Follows the Binding Mechanism of Conformational Selection. Nat.
Commun. 2020, 11, 2740.
(284) Tummino, P. J.; Copeland, R. A. Residence Time of
Receptor−Ligand Complexes and Its Effect on Biological Function.
Biochemistry 2008, 47, 5481−5492.
(285) Changeux, J.-P.; Edelstein, S. Conformational Selection or
Induced Fit? 50 Years of Debate Resolved. F1000 Biol. Rep. 2011, 3,
19.

Review

(286) Okazaki, K.; Takada, S. Dynamic Energy Landscape View of
Coupled Binding and Protein Conformational Change: Induced-Fit
Versus Population-Shift Mechanisms. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.
2008, 105, 11182−11187.
(287) Wlodarski, T.; Zagrovic, B. Conformational Selection and
Induced Fit Mechanism Underlie Specificity in Noncovalent
Interactions with Ubiquitin. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2009, 106,
19346−19351.
(288) Hammes, G. G.; Chang, Y.-C.; Oas, T. G. Conformational
Selection or Induced Fit: A Flux Description of Reaction Mechanism.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2009, 106, 13737−13741.
(289) Freiburger, L.; Miletti, T.; Zhu, S.; Baettig, O.; Berghuis, A.;
Auclair, K.; Mittermaier, A. Substrate-Dependent Switching of the
Allosteric Binding Mechanism of a Dimeric Enzyme. Nat. Chem. Biol.
2014, 10, 937−942.
(290) Thorell, S.; Gergely, P., Jr.; Banki, K.; Perl, A.; Schneider, G.
The Three-Dimensional Structure of Human Transaldolase. FEBS
Lett. 2000, 475, 205−208.
(291) Lehwess-Litzmann, A.; Neumann, P.; Parthier, C.; Lüdtke, S.;
Golbik, R.; Ficner, R.; Tittmann, K. Twisted Schiff Base Intermediates
and Substrate Locale Revise Transaldolase Mechanism. Nat. Chem.
Biol. 2011, 7, 678−684.
(292) Weikl, T. R.; Paul, F. Conformational Selection in Protein
Binding and Function. Protein Sci. 2014, 23, 1508−1518.
(293) Morea, V.; Angelucci, F.; Tame, J. R. H.; Di Cera, E.; Bellelli,
A. Structural Basis of Sequential and Concerted Cooperativity.
Biomolecules 2022, 12, 1651.
(294) Gianni, S.; Dogan, J.; Jemth, P. Distinguishing Induced Fit
from Conformational Selection. Biophys. Chem. 2014, 189, 33−39.
(295) Hilser, V. J.; Thompson, E. B. Intrinsic Disorder as a
Mechanism to Optimize Allosteric Coupling in Proteins. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2007, 104, 8311−8315.
(296) Motlagh, H. N.; Wrabl, J. O.; Li, J.; Hilser, V. J. The Ensemble
Nature of Allostery. Nature 2014, 508, 331−339.
(297) Smith, C. A.; Ban, D.; Pratihar, S.; Giller, K.; Paulat, M.;
Becker, S.; Griesinger, C.; Lee, D.; de Groot, B. L. Allosteric Switch
Regulates Protein−Protein Binding through Collective Motion. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2016, 113, 3269−3274.
(298) Pontiggia, F.; Pachov, D.; Clarkson, M.; Villali, J.; Hagan, M.;
Pande, V.; Kern, D. Free Energy Landscape of Activation in a
Signalling Protein at Atomic Resolution. Nat. Commun. 2015, 6, 7284.
(299) Brüschweiler, S.; Schanda, P.; Kloiber, K.; Brutscher, B.;
Kontaxis, G.; Konrat, R.; Tollinger, M. Direct Observation of the
Dynamic Process Underlying Allosteric Signal Transmission. J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 2009, 131, 3063−3068.
(300) Lu, S.; Jang, H.; Muratcioglu, S.; Gursoy, A.; Keskin, O.;
Nussinov, R.; Zhang, J. Ras Conformational Ensembles, Allostery, and
Signaling. Chem. Rev. 2016, 116, 6607−6665.
(301) Dasgupta, M.; Budday, D.; De Oliveira, S. H.; Madzelan, P.;
Marchany-Rivera, D.; Seravalli, J.; Hayes, B.; Sierra, R. G.; Boutet, S.;
Hunter, M. S.; et al. Mix-and-Inject Xfel Crystallography Reveals
Gated Conformational Dynamics During Enzyme Catalysis. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2019, 116, 25634−25640.
(302) Pabis, A.; Risso, V. A.; Sanchez-Ruiz, J. M.; Kamerlin, S. C.
Cooperativity and Flexibility in Enzyme Evolution. Curr. Opin. Struct.
Biol. 2018, 48, 83−92.
(303) Sawaya, M. R.; Kraut, J. Loop and Subdomain Movements in
the Mechanism of Escherichia Coli Dihydrofolate Reductase:
Crystallographic Evidence. Biochemistry 1997, 36, 586−603.
(304) Petrović, D.; Risso, V. A.; Kamerlin, S. C. L.; Sanchez-Ruiz, J.
M. Conformational Dynamics and Enzyme Evolution. J. R. Soc.
Interface 2018, 15, 20180330.
(305) Otten, R.; Pádua, R. A. P.; Bunzel, H. A.; Nguyen, V.;
Pitsawong, W.; Patterson, M.; Sui, S.; Perry, S. L.; Cohen, A. E.;
Hilvert, D.; et al. How Directed Evolution Reshapes the Energy
Landscape in an Enzyme to Boost Catalysis. Science 2020, 370, 1442−
1446.
9974

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.3c00042
Chem. Rev. 2023, 123, 9940−9981

Chemical Reviews

pubs.acs.org/CR

(306) Tsai, C.-J.; Del Sol, A.; Nussinov, R. Allostery: Absence of a
Change in Shape Does Not Imply That Allostery Is Not at Play. J.
Mol. Biol. 2008, 378, 1−11.
(307) Cooper, A.; Dryden, D. Allostery without Conformational
Change. Eur. Biophys. J. 1984, 11, 103−109.
(308) McLeish, T. C.; Rodgers, T.; Wilson, M. R. Allostery without
Conformation Change: Modelling Protein Dynamics at Multiple
Scales. Phys. Biol. 2013, 10, No. 056004.
(309) Frederick, K. K.; Marlow, M. S.; Valentine, K. G.; Wand, A. J.
Conformational Entropy in Molecular Recognition by Proteins.
Nature 2007, 448, 325−329.
(310) Wang, Y.; VS, M.; Kim, J.; Li, G.; Ahuja, L. G.; Aoto, P.;
Taylor, S. S.; Veglia, G. Globally Correlated Conformational Entropy
Underlies Positive and Negative Cooperativity in a Kinase’s
Enzymatic Cycle. Nat. Commun. 2019, 10, 799.
(311) Tzeng, S.-R.; Kalodimos, C. G. Protein Activity Regulation by
Conformational Entropy. Nature 2012, 488, 236−240.
(312) Hill, T. L.; Levitzki, A. Subunit Neighbor Interactions in
Enzyme Kinetics: Half-of-the-Sites Reactivity in a Dimer. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 1980, 77, 5741−5745.
(313) Victor, J.; Greenberg, L. B.; Sloan, D. L. Studies of the Kinetic
Mechanism of Orotate Phosphoribosyltransferase from Yeast. J. Biol.
Chem. 1979, 254, 2647−2655.
(314) McKay, G. A.; Wright, G. D. Kinetic Mechanism of
Aminoglycoside Phosphotransferase Type Iiia: Evidence for a
Theorell-Chance Mechanism (*). J. Biol. Chem. 1995, 270, 24686−
24692.
(315) Pinto, P. A.; Fraga, I.; Bezerra, R. M. F.; Dias, A. A. Phenolic
and Non-Phenolic Substrates Oxidation by Laccase at Variable
Oxygen Concentrations: Selection of Bisubstrate Kinetic Models from
Polarographic Data. Biochem. Eng. J. 2020, 153, 107423.
(316) McClard, R. W.; Holets, E. A.; MacKinnon, A. L.; Witte, J. F.
Half-of-Sites Binding of Orotidine 5 ‘-Phosphate and Α-D-5Phosphorylribose 1-Diphosphate to Orotate Phosphoribosyltransferase from Saccharomyces Cerevisiae Supports a Novel Variant of the
Theorell− Chance Mechanism with Alternating Site Catalysis.
Biochemistry 2006, 45, 5330−5342.
(317) Hansen, M. R.; Barr, E. W.; Jensen, K. F.; Willemoës, M.;
Grubmeyer, C.; Winther, J. R. Catalytic Site Interactions in Yeast
Omp Synthase. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 2014, 542, 28−38.
(318) Guo, J.; Zhou, H.-X. Protein Allostery and Conformational
Dynamics. Chem. Rev. 2016, 116, 6503−6515.
(319) Bhabha, G.; Lee, J.; Ekiert, D. C.; Gam, J.; Wilson, I. A.;
Dyson, H. J.; Benkovic, S. J.; Wright, P. E. A Dynamic Knockout
Reveals That Conformational Fluctuations Influence the Chemical
Step of Enzyme Catalysis. Science 2011, 332, 234−238.
(320) Daniel, R. M.; Dunn, R. V.; Finney, J. L.; Smith, J. C. The Role
of Dynamics in Enzyme Activity. Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct.
2003, 32, 69−92.
(321) Agarwal, P. K. A Biophysical Perspective on Enzyme Catalysis.
Biochemistry 2019, 58, 438−449.
(322) Pauling, L. Molecular Architecture and Biological Reactions.
Chem. Eng. News 1946, 24, 1375−1377.
(323) Pauling, L. Nature of Forces between Large Molecules of
Biological Interest. Nature 1948, 161, 707−709.
(324) Warshel, A.; Sharma, P. K.; Kato, M.; Xiang, Y.; Liu, H.;
Olsson, M. H. M. Electrostatic Basis for Enzyme Catalysis. Chem. Rev.
2006, 106, 3210−3235.
(325) Shi, G.; Shaw, G. X.; Zhu, F.; Tarasov, S. G.; Ji, X. Bisubstrate
Inhibitors of 6-Hydroxymethyl-7,8-Dihydropterin Pyrophosphokinase: Transition State Analogs for High Affinity Binding. Bioorg.
Med. Chem. 2021, 29, 115847.
(326) McCormick, N. E.; Forget, S. M.; Syvitski, R. T.; Jakeman, D.
L. Mgf(3)(−) and Alf(4)(−) Transition State Analogue Complexes
of Yeast Phosphoglycerate Kinase. Biochem. Cell Biol. 2017, 95, 295−
303.
(327) Firestone, R. S.; Cameron, S. A.; Karp, J. M.; Arcus, V. L.;
Schramm, V. L. Heat Capacity Changes for Transition-State Analogue

Review

Binding and Catalysis with Human 5′-Methylthioadenosine Phosphorylase. ACS Chem. Biol. 2017, 12, 464−473.
(328) Pant, P.; Pathak, A.; Jayaram, B. Symmetric Nucleosides as
Potent Purine Nucleoside Phosphorylase Inhibitors. J. Phys. Chem. B
2021, 125, 2856−2862.
(329) Higgins, E. L.; Kellner-Rogers, J. S.; Estanislau, A. M.;
Esposito, A. C.; Vail, N. R.; Payne, S. R.; Stockwell, J. G.; Ulrich, S. M.
Design, Synthesis, and Evaluation of Transition-State Analogs as
Inhibitors of the Bacterial Quorum Sensing Autoinducer Synthase
Cepi. Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 2021, 39, 127873.
(330) Zhang, D.; Burdette, B. E.; Wang, Z.; Karn, K.; Li, H. Y.;
Schramm, V. L.; Tyler, P. C.; Evans, G. B.; Wang, S. Transition State
Analogues Enhanced by Fragment-Based Structural Analysis: Bacterial
Methylthioadenosine Nucleosidases. Biochemistry 2020, 59, 831−835.
(331) Namanja-Magliano, H. A.; Evans, G. B.; Harijan, R. K.; Tyler,
P. C.; Schramm, V. L. Transition State Analogue Inhibitors of 5′Deoxyadenosine/5′-Methylthioadenosine Nucleosidase from Mycobacterium Tuberculosis. Biochemistry 2017, 56, 5090−5098.
(332) Hohn, C.; Härtsch, A.; Ehrmann, F. R.; Pfaffeneder, T.; Trapp,
N.; Dumele, O.; Klebe, G.; Diederich, F. An Immucillin-Based
Transition-State-Analogous Inhibitor of Trna−Guanine Transglycosylase (Tgt). Chem.�Eur. J. 2016, 22, 6750−6754.
(333) Mahmoodi, N.; Harijan, R. K.; Schramm, V. L. TransitionState Analogues of Phenylethanolamine N-Methyltransferase. J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 2020, 142, 14222−14233.
(334) Zhang, Y.; van Haren, M. J.; Martin, N. I. Peptidic Transition
State Analogues as Prmt Inhibitors. Methods 2020, 175, 24−29.
(335) Roston, D.; Cui, Q. Qm/Mm Analysis of Transition States
and Transition State Analogues in Metalloenzymes. Methods Enzymol.
2016, 577, 213−250.
(336) Kolesniková, L.; León, I.; Alonso, E. R.; Mata, S.; Alonso, J. L.
Laser Ablation Assists Cyclization Reactions of Hydantoic Acid: A
Proof for the near-Attack Conformation Theory? J. Phys. Chem. Lett.
2019, 10, 1325−1330.
(337) Page, M. I.; Jencks, W. P. Entropic Contributions to Rate
Accelerations in Enzymic and Intramolecular Reactions and the
Chelate Effect. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 1971, 68, 1678−1683.
(338) Anderson, V. E. Quantifying Energetic Contributions to
Ground State Destabilization. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 2005, 433, 27−
33.
(339) Villa, J.; Strajbl, M.; Glennon, T. M.; Sham, Y. Y.; Chu, Z. T.;
Warshel, A. How Important Are Entropic Contributions to Enzyme
Catalysis? Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2000, 97, 11899−11904.
(340) Lüdtke, S.; Neumann, P.; Erixon, K. M.; Leeper, F.; Kluger,
R.; Ficner, R.; Tittmann, K. Sub-ångström-Resolution Crystallography
Reveals Physical Distortions That Enhance Reactivity of a Covalent
Enzymatic Intermediate. Nat. Chem. 2013, 5, 762−767.
(341) Rindfleisch, S.; Krull, M.; Uranga, J.; Schmidt, T.; Rabe von
Pappenheim, F.; Kirck, L. L.; Balouri, A.; Schneider, T.; Chari, A.;
Kluger, R.; et al. Ground-State Destabilization by Electrostatic
Repulsion Is Not a Driving Force in Orotidine-5′-Monophosphate
Decarboxylase Catalysis. Nat. Catal. 2022, 5, 332−341.
(342) Levitzki, A.; Koshland, D. E. The Role of Negative
Cooperativity and Half-of-the-Sites Reactivity in Enzyme Regulation.
Curr. Top. Cell. Regul. 1976, 10, 1−40.
(343) Papaleo, E.; Renzetti, G.; Invernizzi, G.; Á sgeirsson, B.
Dynamics Fingerprint and Inherent Asymmetric Flexibility of a ColdAdapted Homodimeric Enzyme. A Case Study of the Vibrio Alkaline
Phosphatase. Biochim. Biophys. Acta - Gen. Subj. 2013, 1830, 2970−
2980.
(344) Mehrabi, P.; Schulz, E. C.; Dsouza, R.; Müller-Werkmeister,
H. M.; Tellkamp, F.; Miller, R. J. D.; Pai, E. F. Time-Resolved
Crystallography Reveals Allosteric Communication Aligned with
Molecular Breathing. Science 2019, 365, 1167−1170.
(345) Seifert, F.; Golbik, R.; Brauer, J.; Lilie, H.; Schröder-Tittmann,
K.; Hinze, E.; Korotchkina, L. G.; Patel, M. S.; Tittmann, K. Direct
Kinetic Evidence for Half-of-the-Sites Reactivity in the E1
Component of the Human Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Multienzyme
9975

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.3c00042
Chem. Rev. 2023, 123, 9940−9981

Chemical Reviews

pubs.acs.org/CR

Complex through Alternating Sites Cofactor Activation. Biochemistry
2006, 45, 12775−12785.
(346) Mochalkin, I.; Miller, J. R.; Evdokimov, A.; Lightle, S.; Yan,
C.; Stover, C. K.; Waldrop, G. L. Structural Evidence for SubstrateInduced Synergism and Half-Sites Reactivity in Biotin Carboxylase.
Protein Sci. 2008, 17, 1706−1718.
(347) de Queiroz, M. S.; Waldrop, G. L. Modeling and Numerical
Simulation of Biotin Carboxylase Kinetics: Implications for Half-Sites
Reactivity. J. Theor. Biol. 2007, 246, 167−175.
(348) Chen, H.; Wei, P.; Huang, C.; Tan, L.; Liu, Y.; Lai, L. Only
One Protomer Is Active in the Dimer of Sars 3c-Like Proteinase. J.
Biol. Chem. 2006, 281, 13894−13898.
(349) Maley, F.; Pedersen-Lane, J.; Changchien, L. Complete
Restoration of Activity to Inactive Mutants of Escherichia Coli
Thymidylate Synthase: Evidence That E. Coli Thymidylate Synthase
Is a Half-the-Sites Activity Enzyme. Biochemistry 1995, 34, 1469−
1474.
(350) Bonin, J. P.; Lee, A. L. Backbone and Ilvm Methyl Resonance
Assignments of Human Thymidylate Synthase in Apo and Substrate
Bound Forms. Biomol. NMR Assign. 2021, 15, 197−202.
(351) Chen, D.; Jansson, A.; Sim, D.; Larsson, A.; Nordlund, P.
Structural Analyses of Human Thymidylate Synthase Reveal a Site
That May Control Conformational Switching between Active and
Inactive States. J. Biol. Chem. 2017, 292, 13449−13458.
(352) Lovelace, L. L.; Gibson, L. M.; Lebioda, L. Cooperative
Inhibition of Human Thymidylate Synthase by Mixtures of Active Site
Binding and Allosteric Inhibitors. Biochemistry 2007, 46, 2823−2830.
(353) Shi, J.; Dertouzos, J.; Gafni, A.; Steel, D.; Palfey, B. A. SingleMolecule Kinetics Reveals Signatures of Half-Sites Reactivity in
Dihydroorotate Dehydrogenase a Catalysis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 2006, 103, 5775−5780.
(354) Castellani, M.; Covian, R.; Kleinschroth, T.; Anderka, O.;
Ludwig, B.; Trumpower, B. L. Direct Demonstration of Half-of-theSites Reactivity in the Dimeric Cytochrome Bc1 Complex: Enzyme
with One Inactive Monomer Is Fully Active but Unable to Activate
the Second Ubiquinol Oxidation Site in Response to Ligand Binding
at the Ubiquinone Reduction Site. J. Biol. Chem. 2010, 285, 502−510.
(355) Nichols, C.; Dhaliwal, B.; Lockyer, M.; Hawkins, A.;
Stammers, D. High-Resolution Structures Reveal Details of Domain
Closure and “Half-of-Sites-Reactivity” in Escherichia Coli Aspartate
Β-Semialdehyde Dehydrogenase. J. Mol. Biol. 2004, 341, 797−806.
(356) Sevostyanova, I.; Solovjeva, O.; Selivanov, V.; Kochetov, G.
Half-of-the-Sites Reactivity of Transketolase from Saccharomyces
Cerevisiae. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 2009, 379, 851−854.
(357) Joseph, E.; Le, C. Q.; Nguyen, T.; Oyugi, M.; Hossain, M. S.;
Foss, F. W., Jr.; Johnson-Winters, K. Evidence of Negative
Cooperativity and Half-Site Reactivity within an F420-Dependent
Enzyme: Kinetic Analysis of F420h2:Nadp(+) Oxidoreductase.
Biochemistry 2016, 55, 1082−1090.
(358) Tsuchiya, D.; Shimizu, N.; Tomita, M. Cooperativity of Two
Active Sites in Bacterial Homodimeric Aconitases. Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 2009, 379, 485−488.
(359) Lambrughi, M.; Sanader Maršić, Ž .; Saez-Jimenez, V.; Mapelli,
V.; Olsson, L.; Papaleo, E. Conformational Gating in Ammonia
Lyases. Biochim. Biophys. Acta - Gen. Subj. 2020, 1864, 129605.
(360) DasGupta, M.; Budday, D.; Madzelan, P.; Seravalli, J.; Hayes,
B.; Sierra, R. G.; Alonso-Mori, R.; Brewster, A. S.; Sauter, N. K.;
Applegate, G. A.et al., Cysteine Modification Can Gate NonEquilibrium Conformational Dynamics During Enzyme Catalysis.
bioRxiv 2019, 524751.
(361) Liu, S.; Misquitta, Y. R.; Olland, A.; Johnson, M. A.; Kelleher,
K. S.; Kriz, R.; Lin, L. L.; Stahl, M.; Mosyak, L. Crystal Structure of a
Human Iκb Kinase Β Asymmetric Dimer. J. Biol. Chem. 2013, 288,
22758−22767.
(362) Duong-Ly, K. C.; Gabelli, S. B.; Xu, W.; Dunn, C. A.;
Schoeffield, A. J.; Bessman, M. J.; Amzel, L. M. The Nudix Hydrolase
Cdp-Chase, a Cdp-Choline Pyrophosphatase, Is an Asymmetric
Dimer with Two Distinct Enzymatic Activities. J. Bacteriol. 2011, 193,
3175−3185.

Review

(363) Levitzki, A.; Stallcup, W. B.; Koshland, D., Jr Half-of-the-Sites
Reactivity and Conformational States of Cytidine Triphosphate
Synthetase. Biochemistry 1971, 10, 3371−3378.
(364) Kaynak, B. T.; Bahar, I.; Doruker, P. Essential Site Scanning
Analysis: A New Approach for Detecting Sites That Modulate the
Dispersion of Protein Global Motions. Comput. Struct. Biotechnol. J.
2020, 18, 1577−1586.
(365) Cramer, J. T.; Führing, J. I.; Baruch, P.; Brütting, C.; Knölker,
H.-J.; Gerardy-Schahn, R.; Fedorov, R. Decoding Allosteric Networks
in Biocatalysts: Rational Approach to Therapies and Biotechnologies.
ACS Catal. 2018, 8, 2683−2692.
(366) Osz, J.; Brélivet, Y.; Peluso-Iltis, C.; Cura, V.; Eiler, S.; Ruff,
M.; Bourguet, W.; Rochel, N.; Moras, D. Structural Basis for a
Molecular Allosteric Control Mechanism of Cofactor Binding to
Nuclear Receptors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2012, 109, E588−
E594.
(367) Rochel, N.; Ciesielski, F.; Godet, J.; Moman, E.; Roessle, M.;
Peluso-Iltis, C.; Moulin, M.; Haertlein, M.; Callow, P.; Mély, Y.; et al.
Common Architecture of Nuclear Receptor Heterodimers on DNA
Direct Repeat Elements with Different Spacings. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol.
2011, 18, 564−570.
(368) Thuy-Boun, A. S.; Thomas, J. M.; Grajo, H. L.; Palumbo, C.
M.; Park, S.; Nguyen, L. T.; Fisher, A. J.; Beal, P. A. Asymmetric
Dimerization of Adenosine Deaminase Acting on Rna Facilitates
Substrate Recognition. Nucleic Acids Res. 2020, 48, 7958−7972.
(369) Anashkin, V. A.; Malinen, A. M.; Bogachev, A. V.; Baykov, A.
A. Catalytic Asymmetry in Homodimeric H+-Pumping Membrane
Pyrophosphatase Demonstrated by Non-Hydrolyzable Pyrophosphate
Analogs. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 9820.
(370) Wielgus-Kutrowska, B.; Grycuk, T.; Bzowska, A. Part-of-theSites Binding and Reactivity in the Homooligomeric Enzymes−Facts
and Artifacts. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 2018, 642, 31−45.
(371) Zhou, Z.; Roelfes, G. Synergistic Catalysis in an Artificial
Enzyme by Simultaneous Action of Two Abiological Catalytic Sites.
Nat. Catal. 2020, 3, 289−294.
(372) Ren, X.; Fasan, R. Synergistic Catalysis in an Artificial
Enzyme. Nat. Catal. 2020, 3, 184−185.
(373) Yue, Y.; Fan, J.; Xin, G.; Huang, Q.; Wang, J.-b.; Li, Y.; Zhang,
Q.; Wang, W. Comprehensive Understanding of Fluoroacetate
Dehalogenase-Catalyzed Degradation of Fluorocarboxylic Acids: A
Qm/Mm Approach. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2021, 55, 9817−9825.
(374) Li, Y.; Zhang, R.; Du, L.; Zhang, Q.; Wang, W. Catalytic
Mechanism of C−F Bond Cleavage: Insights from Qm/Mm Analysis
of Fluoroacetate Dehalogenase. Catal. Sci. Technol. 2016, 6, 73−80.
(375) Chan, P. W.; Yakunin, A. F.; Edwards, E. A.; Pai, E. F.
Mapping the Reaction Coordinates of Enzymatic Defluorination. J.
Am. Chem. Soc. 2011, 133, 7461−7468.
(376) Mehrabi, P.; Di Pietrantonio, C.; Kim, T. H.; Sljoka, A.;
Taverner, K.; Ing, C.; Kruglyak, N.; Pomès, R.; Pai, E. F.; Prosser, R.
S. Substrate-Based Allosteric Regulation of a Homodimeric Enzyme. J.
Am. Chem. Soc. 2019, 141, 11540−11556.
(377) Wang, J.-b.; Ilie, A.; Yuan, S.; Reetz, M. T. Investigating
Substrate Scope and Enantioselectivity of a Defluorinase by a
Stereochemical Probe. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2017, 139, 11241−11247.
(378) Zhang, H.; Tian, S.; Yue, Y.; Li, M.; Tong, W.; Xu, G.; Chen,
B.; Ma, M.; Li, Y.; Wang, J.-b. Semirational Design of Fluoroacetate
Dehalogenase Rpa1163 for Kinetic Resolution of Α-Fluorocarboxylic
Acids on a Gram Scale. ACS Catal. 2020, 10, 3143−3151.
(379) Wang, S.; Thomas, K.; Schramm, V. L. Catalytic Site
Cooperativity in Dimeric Methylthioadenosine Nucleosidase. Biochemistry 2014, 53, 1527−1535.
(380) Tai, L. A.; Hwang, K. C. Cooperative Catalysis in the
Homodimer Subunits of Xanthine Oxidase. Biochemistry 2004, 43,
4869−4876.
(381) Tai, L. A.; Hwang, K. C. Regulation of Xanthine Oxidase
Activity by Substrates at Active Sites Via Cooperative Interactions
between Catalytic Subunits: Implication to Drug Pharmacokinetics.
Curr. Med. Chem. 2011, 18, 69−78.
9976

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.3c00042
Chem. Rev. 2023, 123, 9940−9981

Chemical Reviews

pubs.acs.org/CR

(382) Slotkin, W.; Nishikura, K. Adenosine-to-Inosine Rna Editing
and Human Disease. Genome Med. 2013, 5, 105.
(383) Wang, P.; Doxtader, K. A.; Nam, Y. Structural Basis for
Cooperative Function of Mettl3 and Mettl14 Methyltransferases. Mol.
Cell 2016, 63, 306−317.
(384) Wang, X.; Feng, J.; Xue, Y.; Guan, Z.; Zhang, D.; Liu, Z.;
Gong, Z.; Wang, Q.; Huang, J.; Tang, C.; et al. Structural Basis of N6Adenosine Methylation by the Mettl3−Mettl14 Complex. Nature
2016, 534, 575−578.
(385) Bohn, M.-F.; Shandilya, S. M.; Silvas, T. V.; Nalivaika, E. A.;
Kouno, T.; Kelch, B. A.; Ryder, S. P.; Kurt-Yilmaz, N.; Somasundaran,
M.; Schiffer, C. A. The Ssdna Mutator Apobec3a Is Regulated by
Cooperative Dimerization. Structure 2015, 23, 903−911.
(386) Finer-Moore, J.; Czudnochowski, N.; O’Connell, J. D., III;
Wang, A. L.; Stroud, R. M. Crystal Structure of the Human Trna
M1a58 Methyltransferase−Trna3lys Complex: Refolding of Substrate
Trna Allows Access to the Methylation Target. J. Mol. Biol. 2015, 427,
3862−3876.
(387) Baker, P.; Hillis, C.; Carere, J.; Seah, S. Y. Protein-Protein
Interactions and Substrate Channeling in Orthologous and Chimeric
Aldolase-Dehydrogenase Complexes. Biochemistry 2012, 51, 1942−
1952.
(388) Zhang, Y. H. Substrate Channeling and Enzyme Complexes
for Biotechnological Applications. Biotechnol. Adv. 2011, 29, 715−
725.
(389) Wurm, J. P.; Sung, S.; Kneuttinger, A. C.; Hupfeld, E.; Sterner,
R.; Wilmanns, M.; Sprangers, R. Molecular Basis for the Allosteric
Activation Mechanism of the Heterodimeric Imidazole Glycerol
Phosphate Synthase Complex. Nat. Commun. 2021, 12, 2748.
(390) Dunn, M. F. Allosteric Regulation of Substrate Channeling
and Catalysis in the Tryptophan Synthase Bienzyme Complex. Arch.
Biochem. Biophys. 2012, 519, 154−166.
(391) Busch, F.; Rajendran, C.; Heyn, K.; Schlee, S.; Merkl, R.;
Sterner, R. Ancestral Tryptophan Synthase Reveals Functional
Sophistication of Primordial Enzyme Complexes. Cell Chem. Biol.
2016, 23, 709−715.
(392) Yamane, K.; Toumazou, C.; Tsukada, Y.-i.; ErdjumentBromage, H.; Tempst, P.; Wong, J.; Zhang, Y. Jhdm2a, a JmjcContaining H3k9 Demethylase, Facilitates Transcription Activation
by Androgen Receptor. Cell 2006, 125, 483−495.
(393) Goda, S.; Isagawa, T.; Chikaoka, Y.; Kawamura, T.; Aburatani,
H. Control of Histone H3 Lysine 9 (H3k9) Methylation State Via
Cooperative Two-Step Demethylation by Jumonji Domain Containing 1a (Jmjd1a) Homodimer. J. Biol. Chem. 2013, 288, 36948−36956.
(394) Zhang, Z.; Zheng, Y.; Petukh, M.; Pegg, A.; Ikeguchi, Y.;
Alexov, E. Enhancing Human Spermine Synthase Activity by
Engineered Mutations. PLoS Comput. Biol. 2013, 9, e1002924.
(395) Campbell, B.; Petukh, M.; Alexov, E.; Li, C. On the
Electrostatic Properties of Homodimeric Proteins. J. Theor Comput.
Chem. 2014, 13, 1440007.
(396) Pisliakov, A. V.; Cao, J.; Kamerlin, S. C.; Warshel, A. Enzyme
Millisecond Conformational Dynamics Do Not Catalyze the
Chemical Step. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2009, 106, 17359−17364.
(397) Adamczyk, A. J.; Cao, J.; Kamerlin, S. C.; Warshel, A. Catalysis
by Dihydrofolate Reductase and Other Enzymes Arises from
Electrostatic Preorganization, Not Conformational Motions. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2011, 108, 14115−14120.
(398) Grigorenko, B. L.; Knyazeva, M. A.; Nemukhin, A. V. Analysis
of Proton Wires in the Enzyme Active Site Suggests a Mechanism of
C-Di-Gmp Hydrolysis by the Eal Domain Phosphodiesterases.
Proteins 2016, 84, 1670−1680.
(399) Montemayor, E. J.; Hoffman, D. W. The Crystal Structure of
Spermidine/Spermine N1-Acetyltransferase in Complex with Spermine Provides Insights into Substrate Binding and Catalysis.
Biochemistry 2008, 47, 9145−9153.
(400) Frank, R. A.; Titman, C. M.; Pratap, J. V.; Luisi, B. F.; Perham,
R. N. A Molecular Switch and Proton Wire Synchronize the Active
Sites in Thiamine Enzymes. Science 2004, 306, 872−876.

Review

(401) Schröder-Tittmann, K.; Meyer, D.; Arens, J.; Wechsler, C.;
Tietzel, M.; Golbik, R.; Tittmann, K. Alternating Sites Reactivity Is a
Common Feature of Thiamin Diphosphate-Dependent Enzymes as
Evidenced by Isothermal Titration Calorimetry Studies of Substrate
Binding. Biochemistry 2013, 52, 2505−2507.
(402) Kumaran, D.; Bonanno, J. B.; Burley, S. K.; Swaminathan, S.
Crystal Structure of Phosphatidylglycerophosphatase (Pgpase), a
Putative Membrane-Bound Lipid Phosphatase, Reveals a Novel
Binuclear Metal Binding Site and Two “Proton Wires. Proteins
2006, 64, 851−862.
(403) Cleland, W.; Kreevoy, M. M. Low-Barrier Hydrogen Bonds
and Enzymic Catalysis. Science 1994, 264, 1887−1890.
(404) Frey, P. A.; Whitt, S. A.; Tobin, J. B. A Low-Barrier Hydrogen
Bond in the Catalytic Triad of Serine Proteases. Science 1994, 264,
1927−1930.
(405) Kemp, M. T.; Lewandowski, E. M.; Chen, Y. Low Barrier
Hydrogen Bonds in Protein Structure and Function. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 2021, 1869, 140557.
(406) Schutz, C. N.; Warshel, A. The Low Barrier Hydrogen Bond
(Lbhb) Proposal Revisited: The Case of the Asp··· His Pair in Serine
Proteases. Proteins 2004, 55, 711−723.
(407) Ash, E. L.; Sudmeier, J. L.; De Fabo, E. C.; Bachovchin, W. W.
A Low-Barrier Hydrogen Bond in the Catalytic Triad of Serine
Proteases? Theory Versus Experiment. Science 1997, 278, 1128−1132.
(408) Warshel, A.; Papazyan, A. Energy Considerations Show That
Low-Barrier Hydrogen Bonds Do Not Offer a Catalytic Advantage
over Ordinary Hydrogen Bonds. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 1996,
93, 13665−13670.
(409) Stratton, J. R.; Pelton, J. G.; Kirsch, J. F. A Novel Engineered
Subtilisin Bpn ‘Lacking a Low-Barrier Hydrogen Bond in the Catalytic
Triad. Biochemistry 2001, 40, 10411−10416.
(410) Saadat, D.; Harrison, D. H. Identification of Catalytic Bases in
the Active Site of Escherichia Coli Methylglyoxal Synthase: Cloning,
Expression, and Functional Characterization of Conserved Aspartic
Acid Residues. Biochemistry 1998, 37, 10074−10086.
(411) Dai, S.; Funk, L. M.; von Pappenheim, F. R.; Sautner, V.;
Paulikat, M.; Schroder, B.; Uranga, J.; Mata, R. A.; Tittmann, K. LowBarrier Hydrogen Bonds in Enzyme Cooperativity. Nature 2019, 573,
609−613.
(412) Jacobs, D. J.; Rader, A. J.; Kuhn, L. A.; Thorpe, M. F. Protein
Flexibility Predictions Using Graph Theory. Proteins 2001, 44, 150−
165.
(413) Vivoli, M.; Pang, J.; Harmer, N. J. A Half-Site Multimeric
Enzyme Achieves Its Cooperativity without Conformational Changes.
Sci. Rep. 2017, 7, 16529.
(414) Banco, M. T.; Mishra, V.; Ostermann, A.; Schrader, T. E.;
Evans, G. B.; Kovalevsky, A.; Ronning, D. R. Neutron Structures of
the Helicobacter Pylori 5′-Methylthioadenosine Nucleosidase Highlight Proton Sharing and Protonation States. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S.
A. 2016, 113, 13756−13761.
(415) Tekpinar, M.; Yildirim, A.; Wassenaar, T. A. Molecular
Dynamics Study of the Effect of Active Site Protonation on
Helicobacter Pylori 5′-Methylthioadenosine/S-Adenosylhomocysteine Nucleosidase. Eur. Biophys. J. 2015, 44, 685−696.
(416) Jordan, F. How Active Sites Communicate in Thiamine
Enzymes. Science 2004, 306, 818−820.
(417) Lian, F. M.; Yu, J.; Ma, X. X.; Yu, X. J.; Chen, Y.; Zhou, C. Z.
Structural Snapshots of Yeast Alkyl Hydroperoxide Reductase Ahp1
Peroxiredoxin Reveal a Novel Two-Cysteine Mechanism of Electron
Transfer to Eliminate Reactive Oxygen Species. J. Biol. Chem. 2012,
287, 17077−17087.
(418) Judd, E. T.; Stein, N.; Pacheco, A. A.; Elliott, S. J. Hydrogen
Bonding Networks Tune Proton-Coupled Redox Steps During the
Enzymatic Six-Electron Conversion of Nitrite to Ammonia.
Biochemistry 2014, 53, 5638−5646.
(419) Judd, E. T.; Youngblut, M.; Pacheco, A. A.; Elliott, S. J. Direct
Electrochemistry of Shewanella Oneidensis Cytochrome C Nitrite
Reductase: Evidence of Interactions across the Dimeric Interface.
Biochemistry 2012, 51, 10175−10185.
9977

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.3c00042
Chem. Rev. 2023, 123, 9940−9981

Chemical Reviews

pubs.acs.org/CR

(420) Bien, M.; Longen, S.; Wagener, N.; Chwalla, I.; Herrmann, J.
M.; Riemer, J. Mitochondrial Disulfide Bond Formation Is Driven by
Intersubunit Electron Transfer in Erv1 and Proofread by Glutathione.
Mol. Cell 2010, 37, 516−528.
(421) Sarewicz, M.; Pintscher, S.; Pietras, R.; Borek, A.; Bujnowicz,
Ł.; Hanke, G.; Cramer, W. A.; Finazzi, G.; Osyczka, A. Catalytic
Reactions and Energy Conservation in the Cytochrome Bc 1 and B 6
F Complexes of Energy-Transducing Membranes. Chem. Rev. 2021,
121, 2020−2108.
(422) Weinberg, D. R.; Gagliardi, C. J.; Hull, J. F.; Murphy, C. F.;
Kent, C. A.; Westlake, B. C.; Paul, A.; Ess, D. H.; McCafferty, D. G.;
Meyer, T. J. Proton-Coupled Electron Transfer. Chem. Rev. 2012, 112,
4016−4093.
(423) Hobbs, J. K.; Jiao, W.; Easter, A. D.; Parker, E. J.; Schipper, L.
A.; Arcus, V. L. Change in Heat Capacity for Enzyme Catalysis
Determines Temperature Dependence of Enzyme Catalyzed Rates.
ACS Chem. Biol. 2013, 8, 2388−2393.
(424) Liang, L. L.; Arcus, V. L.; Heskel, M. A.; O’Sullivan, O. S.;
Weerasinghe, L. K.; Creek, D.; Egerton, J. J.; Tjoelker, M. G.; Atkin,
O. K.; Schipper, L. A. Macromolecular Rate Theory (Mmrt) Provides
a Thermodynamics Rationale to Underpin the Convergent Temperature Response in Plant Leaf Respiration. Glob. Chang. Biol. 2018, 24,
1538−1547.
(425) Arcus, V. L.; Prentice, E. J.; Hobbs, J. K.; Mulholland, A. J.;
Van der Kamp, M. W.; Pudney, C. R.; Parker, E. J.; Schipper, L. A. On
the Temperature Dependence of Enzyme-Catalyzed Rates. Biochemistry 2016, 55, 1681−1688.
(426) Prabhu, N. V.; Sharp, K. A. Heat Capacity in Proteins. Annu.
Rev. Phys. Chem. 2005, 56, 521−548.
(427) van der Kamp, M. W.; Prentice, E. J.; Kraakman, K. L.;
Connolly, M.; Mulholland, A. J.; Arcus, V. L. Dynamical Origins of
Heat Capacity Changes in Enzyme-Catalysed Reactions. Nat.
Commun. 2018, 9, 1177.
(428) Höcker, B.; Jürgens, C.; Wilmanns, M.; Sterner, R. Stability,
Catalytic Versatility and Evolution of the (Βα) 8-Barrel Fold. Curr.
Opin. Biotechnol. 2001, 12, 376−381.
(429) Bunzel, H. A.; Anderson, J. L. R.; Hilvert, D.; Arcus, V. L.; van
der Kamp, M. W.; Mulholland, A. J. Evolution of Dynamical
Networks Enhances Catalysis in a Designer Enzyme. Nat. Chem.
2021, 13, 1017−1022.
(430) Oyen, D.; Fenwick, R. B.; Stanfield, R. L.; Dyson, H. J.;
Wright, P. E. Cofactor-Mediated Conformational Dynamics Promote
Product Release from Escherichia Coli Dihydrofolate Reductase Via
an Allosteric Pathway. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2015, 137, 9459−9468.
(431) Gorrell, A.; Ferry, J. G. Investigation of the Methanosarcina
Thermophila Acetate Kinase Mechanism by Fluorescence Quenching.
Biochemistry 2007, 46, 14170−14176.
(432) Miller, S. M.; Massey, V.; Williams, C. H., Jr.; Ballou, D. P.;
Walsh, C. T. Communication between the Active Sites in Dimeric
Mercuric Ion Reductase: An Alternating Sites Hypothesis for
Catalysis. Biochemistry 1991, 30, 2600−2612.
(433) Mallett, T. C.; Claiborne, A. Oxygen Reactivity of an Nadh
Oxidase C42s Mutant: Evidence for a C(4a)-Peroxyflavin Intermediate and a Rate-Limiting Conformational Change. Biochemistry
1998, 37, 8790−8802.
(434) Wei, H.; Zhou, M.-M. Dimerization of a Viral Set Protein
Endows Its Function. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2010, 107, 18433−
18438.
(435) Schliwa, M.; Woehlke, G. Molecular Motors. Nature 2003,
422, 759−765.
(436) DeMirci, H.; Rao, Y.; Stoffel, G. M.; Vogeli, B.; Schell, K.;
Gomez, A.; Batyuk, A.; Gati, C.; Sierra, R. G.; Hunter, M. S.; et al.
Intersubunit Coupling Enables Fast Co2-Fixation by Reductive
Carboxylases. ACS Cent. Sci. 2022, 8, 1091−1101.
(437) Balachandran, N.; Grainger, R. A.; Rob, T.; Liuni, P.; Wilson,
D. J.; Junop, M. S.; Berti, P. J. Role of Half-of-Sites Reactivity and
Inter-Subunit Communications in Dahp Synthase Catalysis and
Regulation. Biochemistry 2022, 61, 2229−2240.

Review

(438) Valle, M. Pyruvate Carboxylase, Structure and Function.
Subcell. Biochem. 2017, 83, 291−322.
(439) Westerhold, L. E.; Adams, S. L.; Bergman, H. L.; Zeczycki, T.
N. Pyruvate Occupancy in the Carboxyl Transferase Domain of
Pyruvate Carboxylase Facilitates Product Release from the Biotin
Carboxylase Domain through an Intermolecular Mechanism.
Biochemistry 2016, 55, 3447−3460.
(440) Yoshida, M.; Muneyuki, E.; Hisabori, T. Atp Synthase�a
Marvellous Rotary Engine of the Cell. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2001, 2,
669−677.
(441) Neupane, P.; Bhuju, S.; Thapa, N.; Bhattarai, H. K. Atp
Synthase: Structure, Function and Inhibition. Biomol. Concepts 2019,
10, 1−10.
(442) Boyer, P. D. The Binding Change Mechanism for Atp
Synthase�Some Probabilities and Possibilities. Biochim. Biophys. Acta
- Bioenerg 1993, 1140, 215−250.
(443) Walker, J. E. The Atp Synthase: The Understood, the
Uncertain and the Unknown. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 2013, 41, 1−16.
(444) Kim, Y.-C.; Snoberger, A.; Schupp, J.; Smith, D. M. Atp
Binding to Neighbouring Subunits and Intersubunit Allosteric
Coupling Underlie Proteasomal Atpase Function. Nat. Commun.
2015, 6, 8520.
(445) Tan, J.; Zhang, X.; Wang, X.; Xu, C.; Chang, S.; Wu, H.;
Wang, T.; Liang, H.; Gao, H.; Zhou, Y.; et al. Structural Basis of
Assembly and Torque Transmission of the Bacterial Flagellar Motor.
Cell 2021, 184, 2665−2679.
(446) Courbet, A.; Hansen, J.; Hsia, Y.; Bethel, N.; Park, Y. J.; Xu,
C.; Moyer, A.; Boyken, S. E.; Ueda, G.; Nattermann, U.; et al.
Computational Design of Mechanically Coupled Axle-Rotor Protein
Assemblies. Science 2022, 376, 383−390.
(447) Raboni, S.; Marchetti, M.; Faggiano, S.; Campanini, B.; Bruno,
S.; Marchesani, F.; Margiotta, M.; Mozzarelli, A. The Energy
Landscape of Human Serine Racemase. Front. Mol. Biosci. 2019, 5,
112.
(448) Goto, M.; Yamauchi, T.; Kamiya, N.; Miyahara, I.; Yoshimura,
T.; Mihara, H.; Kurihara, T.; Hirotsu, K.; Esaki, N. Crystal Structure
of a Homolog of Mammalian Serine Racemase from Schizosaccharomyces Pombe. J. Biol. Chem. 2009, 284, 25944−25952.
(449) Marchetti, M.; Bruno, S.; Campanini, B.; Peracchi, A.; Mai,
N.; Mozzarelli, A. Atp Binding to Human Serine Racemase Is
Cooperative and Modulated by Glycine. FEBS J. 2013, 280, 5853−
5863.
(450) Jitrapakdee, S.; St Maurice, M.; Rayment, I.; Cleland, W. W.;
Wallace, J. C.; Attwood, P. V. Structure, Mechanism and Regulation
of Pyruvate Carboxylase. Biochem. J. 2008, 413, 369−387.
(451) Chai, P.; Lan, P.; Li, S.; Yao, D.; Chang, C.; Cao, M.; Shen, Y.;
Ge, S.; Wu, J.; Lei, M.; et al. Mechanistic Insight into Allosteric
Activation of Human Pyruvate Carboxylase by Acetyl-Coa. Mol. Cell
2022, 82, 4116−4130.
(452) Hanau, S.; d’Empaire, L. P.; Capone, I.; Alberighi, S.;
Montioli, R.; Dallocchio, F. Evidence for Dimer/Tetramer Equilibrium in Trypanosoma Brucei 6-Phosphogluconate Dehydrogenase.
Biochim. Biophys. Acta - Proteins Proteom. 2013, 1834, 2647−2652.
(453) Walden, M.; Tian, L.; Ross, R. L.; Sykora, U. M.; Byrne, D. P.;
Hesketh, E. L.; Masandi, S. K.; Cassel, J.; George, R.; Ault, J. R.; et al.
Metabolic Control of Brisc-Shmt2 Assembly Regulates Immune
Signalling. Nature 2019, 570, 194−199.
(454) Giardina, G.; Brunotti, P.; Fiascarelli, A.; Cicalini, A.; Costa,
M. G.; Buckle, A. M.; di Salvo, M. L.; Giorgi, A.; Marani, M.; Paone,
A.; et al. How Pyridoxal 5′-Phosphate Differentially Regulates Human
Cytosolic and Mitochondrial Serine Hydroxymethyltransferase
Oligomeric State. FEBS J. 2015, 282, 1225−1241.
(455) Maurer, D.; Lohkamp, B.; Krumpel, M.; Widersten, M.;
Dobritzsch, D. Crystal Structure and Ph-Dependent Allosteric
Regulation of Human Β-Ureidopropionase, an Enzyme Involved in
Anticancer Drug Metabolism. Biochem. J. 2018, 475, 2395−2416.
(456) Hüttl, S.; Fiebig, J.; Kutter, S.; Hause, G.; Lilie, H.; Spinka, M.;
König, S. Catalytically Active Filaments - Pyruvate Decarboxylase
9978

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.3c00042
Chem. Rev. 2023, 123, 9940−9981

Chemical Reviews

pubs.acs.org/CR

from Neurospora Crassa. Ph-Controlled Oligomer Structure and
Catalytic Function. FEBS J. 2012, 279, 275−284.
(457) König, S.; Svergan, D.; Koch, M. H.; Hü bner, G.;
Schellenberger, A. The Influence of the Effectors of Yeast Pyruvate
Decarboxylase (Pdc) on the Conformation of the Dimers and
Tetramers and Their Ph-Dependent Equilibrium. Eur. Biophys. J.
1993, 22, 185−194.
(458) König, S.; Svergun, D. I.; Volkov, V. V.; Feigin, L. A.; Koch,
M. H. Small-Angle X-Ray Solution-Scattering Studies on LigandInduced Subunit Interactions of the Thiamine Diphosphate Dependent Enzyme Pyruvate Decarboxylase from Different Organisms.
Biochemistry 1998, 37, 5329−5334.
(459) Koenig, S.; Svergun, D.; Koch, M. H.; Huebner, G.;
Schellenberger, A. Synchrotron Radiation Solution X-Ray Scattering
Study of the Ph-Dependence of the Quarternary Structure of Yeast
Pyruvate Decarboxylase. Biochemistry 1992, 31, 8726−8731.
(460) Siu, K. K.; Asmus, K.; Zhang, A. N.; Horvatin, C.; Li, S.; Liu,
T.; Moffatt, B.; Woods, V. L., Jr.; Howell, P. L. Mechanism of
Substrate Specificity in 5′-Methylthioadenosine/S-Adenosylhomocysteine Nucleosidases. J. Struct. Biol. 2011, 173, 86−98.
(461) Thomas, K.; Cameron, S. A.; Almo, S. C.; Burgos, E. S.;
Gulab, S. A.; Schramm, V. L. Active Site and Remote Contributions to
Catalysis in Methylthioadenosine Nucleosidases. Biochemistry 2015,
54, 2520−2529.
(462) Wu, C. G.; Cheng, S. C.; Chen, S. C.; Li, J. Y.; Fang, Y. H.;
Chen, Y. H.; Chou, C. Y. Mechanism for Controlling the MonomerDimer Conversion of Sars Coronavirus Main Protease. Acta
Crystallogr. D Biol. Crystallogr. 2013, 69, 747−755.
(463) Shi, J.; Sivaraman, J.; Song, J. Mechanism for Controlling the
Dimer-Monomer Switch and Coupling Dimerization to Catalysis of
the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 3c-Like
Protease. J. Virol. 2008, 82, 4620−4629.
(464) Cheng, S. C.; Chang, G. G.; Chou, C. Y. Mutation of Glu-166
Blocks the Substrate-Induced Dimerization of Sars Coronavirus Main
Protease. Biophys. J. 2010, 98, 1327−1336.
(465) Royer, W. E., Jr. High-Resolution Crystallographic Analysis of
a Co-Operative Dimeric Hemoglobin. J. Mol. Biol. 1994, 235, 657−
681.
(466) Sheu, S. Y.; Liu, Y. C.; Yang, D. Y. Interfacial Water Effect on
Cooperativity and Signal Communication in Scapharca Dimeric
Hemoglobin. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2017, 19, 7380−7389.
(467) Furukawa, N.; Miyanaga, A.; Nakajima, M.; Taguchi, H.
Structural Basis of Sequential Allosteric Transitions in Tetrameric DLactate Dehydrogenases from Three Gram-Negative Bacteria.
Biochemistry 2018, 57, 5388−5406.
(468) Liu, Q.; Chai, J.; Moche, M.; Guy, J.; Lindqvist, Y.; Shanklin, J.
Half-of-the-Sites Reactivity of the Castor Δ9−18:0-Acyl Carrier
Protein Desaturase. Plant Physiol. 2015, 169, 432−441.
(469) Tibbs, Z. E.; Falany, C. N. An Engineered Heterodimeric
Model to Investigate Sult1b1 Dependence on Intersubunit
Communication. Biochem. Pharmacol. 2016, 115, 123−133.
(470) Pentikäinen, U.; Pentikäinen, O. T.; Mulholland, A. J.
Cooperative Symmetric to Asymmetric Conformational Transition
of the Apo-Form of Scavenger Decapping Enzyme Revealed by
Simulations. Proteins 2008, 70, 498−508.
(471) Bitra, A.; Hussain, B.; Tanwar, A. S.; Anand, R. Identification
of Function and Mechanistic Insights of Guanine Deaminase from
Nitrosomonas Europaea: Role of the C-Terminal Loop in Catalysis.
Biochemistry 2013, 52, 3512−3522.
(472) Curado-Carballada, C.; Feixas, F.; Osuna, S. Molecular
Dynamics Simulations on Aspergillus Niger Monoamine Oxidase:
Conformational Dynamics and Inter-Monomer Communication
Essential for Its Efficient Catalysis. Adv. Synth. Catal. 2019, 361,
2718−2726.
(473) Bonk, B. M.; Weis, J. W.; Tidor, B. Machine Learning
Identifies Chemical Characteristics That Promote Enzyme Catalysis.
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2019, 141, 4108−4118.
(474) Liao, Q.; Kulkarni, Y.; Sengupta, U.; Petrović, D. a.;
Mulholland, A. J.; van der Kamp, M. W.; Strodel, B.; Kamerlin, S.

Review

C. L. Loop Motion in Triosephosphate Isomerase Is Not a Simple
Open and Shut Case. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2018, 140, 15889−15903.
(475) Lasso, G.; Yu, L. P.; Gil, D.; Lázaro, M.; Tong, L.; Valle, M.
Functional Conformations for Pyruvate Carboxylase During Catalysis
Explored by Cryoelectron Microscopy. Structure 2014, 22, 911−922.
(476) Lietzan, A. D.; Menefee, A. L.; Zeczycki, T. N.; Kumar, S.;
Attwood, P. V.; Wallace, J. C.; Cleland, W. W.; St. Maurice, M.
Interaction between the Biotin Carboxyl Carrier Domain and the
Biotin Carboxylase Domain in Pyruvate Carboxylase from Rhizobium
Etli. Biochemistry 2011, 50, 9708−9723.
(477) Huang, R.; Ripstein, Z. A.; Rubinstein, J. L.; Kay, L. E.
Cooperative Subunit Dynamics Modulate P97 Function. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2019, 116, 158−167.
(478) Zorzini, V.; Mernik, A.; Lah, J.; Sterckx, Y. G. J.; De Jonge, N.;
Garcia-Pino, A.; De Greve, H.; Versées, W.; Loris, R. Substrate
Recognition and Activity Regulation of the Escherichia Coli Mrna
Endonuclease Mazf. J. Biol. Chem. 2016, 291, 10950−10960.
(479) Li, G. Y.; Zhang, Y.; Chan, M. C.; Mal, T. K.; Hoeflich, K. P.;
Inouye, M.; Ikura, M. Characterization of Dual Substrate Binding
Sites in the Homodimeric Structure of Escherichia Coli Mrna
Interferase Mazf. J. Mol. Biol. 2006, 357, 139−150.
(480) Ehrmann, F. R.; Stojko, J.; Metz, A.; Debaene, F.; Barandun,
L. J.; Heine, A.; Diederich, F.; Cianférani, S.; Reuter, K.; Klebe, G.
Soaking Suggests ″Alternative Facts″: Only Co-Crystallization
Discloses Major Ligand-Induced Interface Rearrangements of a
Homodimeric Trna-Binding Protein Indicating a Novel Mode-ofInhibition. PLoS One 2017, 12, No. e0175723.
(481) Lee, C.-Y.; Lin, C.-C.; Liu, Y.-L.; Liu, G.-Y.; Liu, J.-H.; Hung,
H.-C. Molecular Interplay between the Dimer Interface and the
Substrate-Binding Site of Human Peptidylarginine Deiminase 4. Sci.
Rep. 2017, 7, 42662.
(482) Myers, D. P.; Jackson, L. K.; Ipe, V. G.; Murphy, G. E.;
Phillips, M. A. Long-Range Interactions in the Dimer Interface of
Ornithine Decarboxylase Are Important for Enzyme Function.
Biochemistry 2001, 40, 13230−13236.
(483) Sapienza, P. J.; Popov, K. I.; Mowrey, D. D.; Falk, B. T.;
Dokholyan, N. V.; Lee, A. L. Inter-Active Site Communication
Mediated by the Dimer Interface Β-Sheet in the Half-the-Sites
Enzyme, Thymidylate Synthase. Biochemistry 2019, 58, 3302−3313.
(484) Ambrus, V.; Hoffka, G.; Fuxreiter, M. Asymmetric Dynamic
Coupling Promotes Alternative Evolutionary Pathways in an Enzyme
Dimer. Sci. Rep. 2020, 10, 18866.
(485) Xu, Y.; Li, H.; Jin, Y.-H.; Fan, J.; Sun, F. Dimerization
Interface of 3-Hydroxyacyl-Coa Dehydrogenase Tunes the Formation
of Its Catalytic Intermediate. PLoS One 2014, 9, e95965.
(486) Jin, Z.; Du, X.; Xu, Y.; Deng, Y.; Liu, M.; Zhao, Y.; Zhang, B.;
Li, X.; Zhang, L.; Peng, C.; et al. Structure of Mpro from Sars-Cov-2
and Discovery of Its Inhibitors. Nature 2020, 582, 289−293.
(487) Zhang, L.; Lin, D.; Sun, X.; Curth, U.; Drosten, C.;
Sauerhering, L.; Becker, S.; Rox, K.; Hilgenfeld, R. Crystal Structure
of Sars-Cov-2 Main Protease Provides a Basis for Design of Improved
Α-Ketoamide Inhibitors. Science 2020, 368, 409−412.
(488) Barrila, J.; Bacha, U.; Freire, E. Long-Range Cooperative
Interactions Modulate Dimerization in Sars 3clpro. Biochemistry 2006,
45, 14908−14916.
(489) Barrila, J.; Gabelli, S. B.; Bacha, U.; Amzel, L. M.; Freire, E.
Mutation of Asn28 Disrupts the Dimerization and Enzymatic Activity
of Sars 3cl(Pro). Biochemistry 2010, 49, 4308−4317.
(490) Ferreira, J. C.; Fadl, S.; Rabeh, W. M. Key Dimer Interface
Residues Impact the Catalytic Activity of 3clpro, the Main Protease of
Sars-Cov-2. J. Biol. Chem. 2022, 298, 102023.
(491) Perrino, F. W.; de Silva, U.; Harvey, S.; Pryor, E. E., Jr.; Cole,
D. W.; Hollis, T. Cooperative DNA Binding and Communication
across the Dimer Interface in the Trex2 3′ –> 5′-Exonuclease. J. Biol.
Chem. 2008, 283, 21441−21452.
(492) Scrutton, N. S.; Deonarain, M. P.; Berry, A.; Perham, R. N.
Cooperativity Induced by a Single Mutation at the Subunit Interface
of a Dimeric Enzyme: Glutathione Reductase. Science 1992, 258,
1140−1143.
9979

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.3c00042
Chem. Rev. 2023, 123, 9940−9981

Chemical Reviews

pubs.acs.org/CR

(493) Creager-Allen, R. L.; Silversmith, R. E.; Bourret, R. B. A Link
between Dimerization and Autophosphorylation of the Response
Regulator Phob. J. Biol. Chem. 2013, 288, 21755−21769.
(494) Wu, X.; Ye, S.; Guo, S.; Yan, W.; Bartlam, M.; Rao, Z.
Structural Basis for a Reciprocating Mechanism of Negative
Cooperativity in Dimeric Phosphagen Kinase Activity. FASEB J.
2010, 24, 242−252.
(495) Sehanobish, E.; Williamson, H. R.; Davidson, V. L. Roles of
Conserved Residues of the Glycine Oxidase Goxa in Controlling
Activity, Cooperativity, Subunit Composition, and Cysteine Tryptophylquinone Biosynthesis. J. Biol. Chem. 2016, 291, 23199−23207.
(496) Campbell, E. C.; Correy, G. J.; Mabbitt, P. D.; Buckle, A. M.;
Tokuriki, N.; Jackson, C. J. Laboratory Evolution of Protein
Conformational Dynamics. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 2018, 50, 49−57.
(497) Tokuriki, N.; Tawfik, D. S. Protein Dynamism and
Evolvability. Science 2009, 324, 203−207.
(498) Zou, T.; Risso, V. A.; Gavira, J. A.; Sanchez-Ruiz, J. M.;
Ozkan, S. B. Evolution of Conformational Dynamics Determines the
Conversion of a Promiscuous Generalist into a Specialist Enzyme.
Mol. Biol. Evol. 2015, 32, 132−143.
(499) Campbell, E.; Kaltenbach, M.; Correy, G. J.; Carr, P. D.;
Porebski, B. T.; Livingstone, E. K.; Afriat-Jurnou, L.; Buckle, A. M.;
Weik, M.; Hollfelder, F.; et al. The Role of Protein Dynamics in the
Evolution of New Enzyme Function. Nat. Chem. Biol. 2016, 12, 944−
950.
(500) Kamisetty, H.; Ovchinnikov, S.; Baker, D. Assessing the Utility
of Coevolution-Based Residue-Residue Contact Predictions in a
Sequence- and Structure-Rich Era. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2013,
110, 15674−15679.
(501) Soskine, M.; Tawfik, D. S. Mutational Effects and the
Evolution of New Protein Functions. Nat. Rev. Genet. 2010, 11, 572−
582.
(502) Bruystens, J. G.; Wu, J.; Fortezzo, A.; Kornev, A. P.;
Blumenthal, D. K.; Taylor, S. S. Pka Riα Homodimer Structure
Reveals an Intermolecular Interface with Implications for Cooperative
Camp Binding and Carney Complex Disease. Structure 2014, 22, 59−
69.
(503) Ferreira, P.; Cerqueira, N.; Coelho, C.; Fernandes, P. A.;
Romão, M. J.; Ramos, M. J. New Insights About the Monomer and
Homodimer Structures of the Human Aox1. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys.
2019, 21, 13545−13554.
(504) Huo, X.; Li, G.; Wang, X.; Zhang, W. Bimetallic Catalysis in
Stereodivergent Synthesis. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2022, 61,
e202210086.
(505) Katsuki, T.; Sharpless, K. B. The First Practical Method for
Asymmetric Epoxidation. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1980, 102, 5974−5976.
(506) Finn, M.; Sharpless, K. B. Mechanism of Asymmetric
Epoxidation. 2. Catalyst Structure. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1991, 113,
113−126.
(507) Wu, Y.-D.; Lai, D. K. A Density Functional Study on the
Stereocontrol of the Sharpless Epoxidation. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1995,
117, 11327−11336.
(508) Martinez, L. E.; Leighton, J. L.; Carsten, D. H.; Jacobsen, E. N.
Highly Enantioselective Ring Opening of Epoxides Catalyzed by
(Salen) Cr (Iii) Complexes. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1995, 117, 5897−5898.
(509) Hansen, K. B.; Leighton, J. L.; Jacobsen, E. N. On the
Mechanism of Asymmetric Nucleophilic Ring-Opening of Epoxides
Catalyzed by (Salen) Criii Complexes. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1996, 118,
10924−10925.
(510) Satyanarayana, T.; Abraham, S.; Kagan, H. B. Nonlinear
Effects in Asymmetric Catalysis. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2009, 48,
456−494.
(511) Zhu, S.-F.; Xu, B.; Wang, G.-P.; Zhou, Q.-L. Well-Defined
Binuclear Chiral Spiro Copper Catalysts for Enantioselective N−H
Insertion. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2012, 134, 436−442.
(512) Wang, X. Z.; Meng, S. L.; Xiao, H.; Feng, K.; Wang, Y.; Jian, J.
X.; Li, X. B.; Tung, C. H.; Wu, L. Z. Identifying a Real Catalyst of
[Nife]-Hydrogenase Mimic for Exceptional H(2) Photogeneration.
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2020, 59, 18400−18404.

Review

(513) Fricke, C.; Sperger, T.; Mendel, M.; Schoenebeck, F. Catalysis
with Palladium(I) Dimers. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2021, 60, 3355−
3366.
(514) Hill, D. E.; Pei, Q.-l.; Zhang, E.-x.; Gage, J. R.; Yu, J.-Q.;
Blackmond, D. G. A General Protocol for Addressing Speciation of
the Active Catalyst Applied to Ligand-Accelerated Enantioselective
C(Sp3)−H Bond Arylation. ACS Catal. 2018, 8, 1528−1531.
(515) Uyeda, C.; Farley, C. M. Dinickel Active Sites Supported by
Redox-Active Ligands. Acc. Chem. Res. 2021, 54, 3710−3719.
(516) Makarov, S. G.; Ketkov, S. Y.; Wöhrle, D. A Planar Binuclear
Cobalt (Ii) Phthalocyanine as a Highly Efficient Catalyst for the
Oxidation of a Mercaptan. Chem. Commun. 2020, 56, 5653−5656.
(517) Zhang, H. T.; Su, X. J.; Xie, F.; Liao, R. Z.; Zhang, M. T. IronCatalyzed Water Oxidation: O-O Bond Formation Via Intramolecular
Oxo-Oxo Interaction. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2021, 60, 12467−12474.
(518) Schore, N. E. The P Auson−K Hand Cycloaddition Reaction
for Synthesis of Cyclopentenones. Org. React. 1991, 40, 1−90.
(519) Hartline, D. R.; Zeller, M.; Uyeda, C. Well-Defined Models
for the Elusive Dinuclear Intermediates of the Pauson−Khand
Reaction. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2016, 55, 6084−6087.
(520) Harrold, N. D.; Waterman, R.; Hillhouse, G. L.; Cundari, T.
R. Group-Transfer Reactions of Nickel−Carbene and − Nitrene
Complexes with Organoazides and Nitrous Oxide That Form New
C�N, C�O, and N�N Bonds. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2009, 131,
12872−12873.
(521) Mankad, N. P. Selectivity Effects in Bimetallic Catalysis.
Chem.�Eur. J. 2016, 22, 5822−5829.
(522) Kanteev, M.; Goldfeder, M.; Fishman, A. Structure-Function
Correlations in Tyrosinases. Protein Sci. 2015, 24, 1360−1369.
(523) Banerjee, R.; Jones, J. C.; Lipscomb, J. D. Soluble Methane
Monooxygenase. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 2019, 88, 409−431.
(524) Kato, S.; Matsui, T.; Gatsogiannis, C.; Tanaka, Y. Molluscan
Hemocyanin: Structure, Evolution, and Physiology. Biophys. Rev.
2018, 10, 191−202.
(525) Brändén, G.; Neutze, R. Advances and Challenges in TimeResolved Macromolecular Crystallography. Science 2021, 373,
eaba0954.
(526) O’Rourke, K. F.; Gorman, S. D.; Boehr, D. D. Biophysical and
Computational Methods to Analyze Amino Acid Interaction Networks in Proteins. Comput. Struct. Biotechnol. J. 2016, 14, 245−251.
(527) Chan, H. T. H.; Oliveira, A. S. F.; Schofield, C. J.; Mulholland,
A. J.; Duarte, F. Dynamical Nonequilibrium Molecular Dynamics
Simulations Identify Allosteric Sites and Positions Associated with
Drug Resistance in the Sars-Cov-2 Main Protease. JACS Au 2023, 3,
1767.
(528) Bunzel, H. A.; Anderson, J. L. R.; Mulholland, A. J. Designing
Better Enzymes: Insights from Directed Evolution. Curr. Opin. Struct.
Biol. 2021, 67, 212−218.
(529) Russ, W. P.; Figliuzzi, M.; Stocker, C.; Barrat-Charlaix, P.;
Socolich, M.; Kast, P.; Hilvert, D.; Monasson, R.; Cocco, S.; Weigt,
M.; et al. An Evolution-Based Model for Designing Chorismate
Mutase Enzymes. Science 2020, 369, 440−445.
(530) Xie, W. J.; Asadi, M.; Warshel, A. Enhancing Computational
Enzyme Design by a Maximum Entropy Strategy. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 2022, 119, e2122355119.
(531) Xie, W. J.; Warshel, A. Natural Evolution Provides Strong
Hints About Laboratory Evolution of Designer Enzymes. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2022, 119, e2207904119.
(532) Spence, M. A.; Kaczmarski, J. A.; Saunders, J. W.; Jackson, C.
J. Ancestral Sequence Reconstruction for Protein Engineers. Curr.
Opin. Struct. Biol. 2021, 69, 131−141.
(533) Dauparas, J.; Anishchenko, I.; Bennett, N.; Bai, H.; Ragotte, R.
J.; Milles, L. F.; Wicky, B. I. M.; Courbet, A.; de Haas, R. J.; Bethel,
N.; et al. Robust Deep Learning−Based Protein Sequence Design
Using Proteinmpnn. Science 2022, 378, 49−56.
(534) Madani, A.; Krause, B.; Greene, E. R.; Subramanian, S.; Mohr,
B. P.; Holton, J. M.; Olmos, J. L., Jr; Xiong, C.; Sun, Z. Z.; Socher, R.;
et al. Large Language Models Generate Functional Protein Sequences
across Diverse Families. Nat. Biotechnol. 2023, 1−8.
9980

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.3c00042
Chem. Rev. 2023, 123, 9940−9981

Chemical Reviews

pubs.acs.org/CR

Review

(535) Nijkamp, E.; Ruffolo, J.; Weinstein, E. N.; Naik, N.; Madani,
A., Progen2: Exploring the Boundaries of Protein Language Models.
arXiv 2022, arXiv:2206.13517.
(536) Yu, T.; Cui, H.; Li, J. C.; Luo, Y.; Jiang, G.; Zhao, H. Enzyme
Function Prediction Using Contrastive Learning. Science 2023, 379,
1358−1363.

9981

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.3c00042
Chem. Rev. 2023, 123, 9940−9981

